THE PRIMROSE PATH.
BY A, STOKER, ESQ.
Chapter I.—A Happy Home

1
I WONDER will any of them come, Jerry ?”
The pretty, little woman's face got puckered all
over with baby wrinkles, moro suitable to the wee
pink face that lay on her bosom than to her own
somewhat pale one, as she made the remark.
Jerry looked up from his newspaper and gazed at her lovingly
for a moment before he answered, his answer being a confident
smile with a knowing shake of the. head from aide to side as
who should say—" Oh, you little humbug, pretending to distress 
yourself with doubts, Of course, they'll come—all of them.”

Katey seemed to lose her trouble in his smile—it is wonderful
what comforters love and sympathy are. She drew close to her
husband and held down the tiny bald pink head for him to kins,
and then, leaning her cheek against his, said in a soft cooing
voice, half wifely, half motherly, ‘‘ Oh, Jerry, isn’t he a little
beauty.”
Children are quite as jealous as dogs and cats In their own
way, and instinctively the urchin sprawling on the hearth-rug
came over and pulled at his mother's dross, saying plaintively
"Me too, mammy—ma too.”
Jerry took the child on his knee, ‘ Eh, little Jerry, your
nose is out of joint again ; isn’t it?"
A mother is jealous as well as her child, and this mother
answered—" Oh, no, Jerry, sure I don’t love him less because
I have to take care of the little mite.”

2
Further conversation was stopped by a knock at the door.
"That's some of them stayin’ away,” said Jerry, as he went
out to open the door.
As may be seen, Jerry and his wife expected company, the
doubts as to whose arrival was caused by the extreme inclemency
of the weather, and as the occasion of the festivities was an
important one, the doubts were strong.
Jerry O'Sullivan was a prosperous man in his line of life,
His trade was that of s carpenter, and as he had, in addition to
large practical skill and experience gained from unremitting toll
a considerable share of natural ability, was justly considered
by his compeers to be the makings of a successful man.
Three years before he had been married to his pretty little
wife, whose sweet nature, and care for his comfort, und whose
desire to perfect the cheerfulness of home, bad nota little aided
his success, and kept him on the straight path.
If every wife understood the merits which a cheerful home
has above all other places in the eyes of an ordinary man, there
would be less brutality than there is amongst husbands, and less
hardships and suffering amongst wives.
The third child had just been christened, and some friends
and relatives were expected to do honour to the occasion, and
now the knock announced the frat arrival.
Whilst Jerry went to the door, Katey arranged the child's
garments do as to make him look as nice as possible, and also
fixed her own dress, somewhat disturbed by maternal cares.
In the meantime little Jerry flattened his nose against the
window pane in a vain desire to see the appearance of the first
arrival. Little Katey stood by him looking expectant as though
her eyes were with her brother’s.
Mrs, Jerry's boat smile showed that the newcomer, Mr.
Parnell, was a special friend. After shaking hands with him
she stood close to him, and showed him the baby, looking up
into his dark strong face with a smile of perfect trust. He
was so tall that he had to stoop to kiss the baby, although the
little mother raised it in her arms for him. He said very tenderly-
“Let me hold him a minute in my arms.”
He lifted him gently as he spoke, and bonding his head, said
reverently :—
“ God bless him. Suffer little children to come unto me, for
of such is the kingdom of Heaven.”
Katey's eyes were full of tears as she took him back, and
she thanked the big man with a look too full of sacred feeling
for even a smile.
Jerry stood by in silence. He felt much, although be did not
know what to say.
Another knock was heard, and again Jerry's services were
required. This time there was a large influx, for three different 
bodies had joined just at the door, Much laughter was
heard in the hall, and then they all entered. Tho body consisted
of seven souls all told.
Place aux dames. We Irishmen must give first place always
to the ladies, Of these there were four. Jerry's mother and
her assistant, Miss M‘Anaspie, and Katey's two sisters, one
older and one younger than herself. The men were, Mr. Muldoon, 
Tom Price, add Patrick Casey,
Jerry's mother was a quiet dignified old lady, very gentle in
manner, but with a sternness of thought and purpose which
shone through her gentleness and forbid any attempt at imposition, 
as sorely as the green light marks danger at a railway
crossing. She had a small haberdashery shop, by which she was reputed 
amongst her friends to have realised a considerable amount
of money, Miss M‘Anaspie was her assistant, and was asked
by Katey to be present out of pure kindness. She had
originally set her cap at Jerry, and had very nearly succeeded
in her aim. It was no small evidence of Katey’s genuine goodness 
of nature and her perfect trust of her husband that she
was present ; for most women have a feeling of possible hostility,
or, at least, maintain an armed neutrality towards the former
flames of the men that they love. Miss M‘Anaspie was tall
and buxom, and of lively manners, quite devoid of bashfulness.
It puzzled many of her friends how, with her desire to be
married, she had not long ago succeeded in accomplishing her
wish. Katey's sisters were pleasant, quiet girls, both engaged
to be married—Jane to Price, and Mary to Casey, the former

man being a blacksmith, and the latter an umbrella-maker,
both being sturdy young fellows, and looking forward to being
shortly able to marry.
Mr, Muldoon was the great man of the occasion, He was a 
cousin of Mrs. O'Sullivan’s, and was rich. He had a large
Italian warehouse, which he managed well, and consequently
was exceedingly prosperous. Personally he was not so agreeable
as he might have been, He was small, and stout, and ugly,
with keen eyes, a sharply pointed nose; was habitually clean-shaven, 
and kept his breast stuck out like that of a ponter
pigeon. He always dressed gorgeously, and on the present occasion, 
as he considered that he was honouring his poor relations, 
had got himself up to a pitch of such radiance that his
old servant had commented on his appearance as he had
Left home. His trousers were of the lightest yellow whipcord ;
his coat was blue ; his waistcoat was red velvet, with blue glass
buttons ; and in the matter of green tie, high collar, and large
cuffs he excelled. His watch chain, of massive gold, with the
" pint of seals ” attached to the fob-chain after the manner of
the bucks of the last generation was alone worthy
of respect. His temper was not pleasant, for he was dictatorial
to the last degree, and had a very unpleasant habit,
something like Frederick the Great, of considering any difference
of opinion as an insult intentionally offered to himself.
A man like this may be a pleasant enough companion so long
as he goes with the tide, he thinking that it is the tide which
goes with hit ; but when occasion of difference arises, the social
horizon at once becomes overcast with angry clouds which gather
quickly till the storm has burst. Oftentimes, as in nature—the
great world of elements—the storm clears the air.
Mr. Muldoon had been asked as an act possibly likely to
benefit the new olive branch, for the Italian grocer was unmarried, 
and might at some future time, so thought Jerry and
Katey in their secret hearts, take in charge the destinies of the
new infant to-day made John Muldoon O'Sullivan.
When the party entered the room Mr, Muldoon had advanced
to Mrs. Jerry, and, as she was a pretty little woman, had kissed
her in a semi-paternal way which made Miss M‘Anaspie giggle.
Mr. Muldoon looked round half indignantly, for he felt that
his dignity was wounded. He considered that Miss M'Anaspie
of whose very name he was ignorant, was a forward young
person, and in his mind determined to let her understand so 
before the evening was over.
After a few minutes the introductions had all been accomplished, 
and everybody knew everybody else. There was a great
kissing of the baby, great petting of the two elder children, for
whose delectation sundry sweets were produced from mysterious
pockets, and much laughter and good-humoured jesting.
Mr. Muldoon prided himself upon being a good hand at saying
smart things, and felt that the present occasion was not one to
be thrown away. Being a bachelor, he considered that his most
proper attitude was that of ignorance—utter ignorance regarding 
babies in general, and this one in particular. When he was
shown the baby he put up his eye-glass, and said : 
"What is this?”
“Oh, Mr, Muldoon,” said the mother, almost reproachfully.
“Sure, don’t you know this is the new baby ?”
“Oh! oh! indeed. It is very bald.”
“It won't be long so, then,” interrupted Miss M‘Anaspie
pertly. “You can make it your hair, if you will,” Her English 
method of aspiration pointed the joke.
Mr. Muldoon looked at her almost savagely, but said nothing.
He did not want to commit himself to any intention of siding
the child’s career; and he was obliged to remain silent. He
mentally scored another black mark against the speaker.
Presently he spoke again.
"Is it a boy or a girl ?" 
"A boy."
“ And are these boys or girls?" He pointed as he spoke to
little Jerry and little Katey.
Miss M‘Anaspie answered again— " Neither. They are half
of each.”
“Dear me,” said Mr. Muldoon. " Can that be ?”
“Don't you see,” said Miss M‘Anaspie in a tone which implied 
the addition of the words, ‘you silly old fool:,' "one is a
boy and the other girl.”

3
Mr. Muldoon made another black mark in his mental notebook, 
and ignoring his opponent, as he already considered Miss
M‘Anaspie, spoke again to Katey.
“And are these all yours? Three children ; and you have
been married—let me see, how long?"
“Three years and two months."
"Why, at this rate, what will you do in twenty years. Just
fancy twenty children. Really, Mrs. Katey, you should take
the pledge."
"Katey did not know what to answer, and so stayed silent.
Miss M‘Anaspie turned away to hide an imagined blush, and
Mr. Muldoon feeling that he had said something striking, began
to unbend and mix with the rest of the company in a better
humour than he had been in for some some.
The table was ready set with all the materials for comfort,
and as the teapot was basking inside the fender beside a dish
of highly buttered cake, the work of Mrs. Jerry herself, and
the kettle singing songs of a bacchanalian character on the fire,
promise of comfort to the foes and friends of Father Mathew
was not wanting.
There was great arranging of places at the table. Jane and
Mary with their sweethearts managed to monopolise one entire
side, sitting alternately like the bread and ham in the pile of
sandwiches before them.
Mr, Muldoon was put next to Katey, and Jerry had his
mother on his right hand, she being supported on the other side
by Mr. Parnell. This left Miss M‘Anaspie to take her seat
without choice, between the two eldest men of the party.
She did not shrink from the undertaking, however, but sat
down, saying pertly to the company, but to no one in particular—
“My usual luck. Never mind. I like to have an old man
an each side of me."
Mr, Muldoon liked to be thought young—most middle-aged
Bachelors do—and he looked his disapprobation of the remark
so strongly that a silence fell on all.
The dowager Mrs. O'Sullivan said quietly—
“You let your tongue run too fast, Margaret, You forget
Mr. Muldoon is a new friend of yours, and not an old one.”
Mrs. M‘Anaspie had already even that she had made a mistake, 
and was only waiting for an opportunity of correcting it,
so she seized it greedily.
“I am so awfully sorry, I hope, sir, I did not offend.
Indeed I wished to please. I thought that young people wished
to be thought old. I know that I did when I was young.”
"That was some time ago,” whispered Pat Casey to Mary,
who laughed too suddenly, and was nearly caught at it.
“Mr. Muldoon was mollified. He thought to himself that
perhaps the poor girl did not mean to give offence ; that she was
a clever girl; much nicer after all than most girls ; however
that he would have an eye on her, and see what she was like.
For some time the consumption of the good things occupied
the attention of everybody. Mrs. Jerry handed a cup of tea
to Mr. Parnell before any of the rest of the men, saying—
“I know you like that better than anything else.’
“That I do,” he answered heartily, There is as much
virtue in this as there is evil in beer, and whisky, and gin, and
all other abominations.”
No one felt inclined to take up, at present at all evenis, the
total-abstinence glove thus thrown down, and so the subject
dropped.
It would have done one good to have seen the care which
Katey’s sisters took of their sweethearts, piling up their plates
with everything that was nice, and keeping them as steadily at
work as if they had been engaged in a contest as to who should
consume the largest quantity in the smallest time. This was a
species of friendly rivalry in which the men found equal pleasure
with the girls.
It is quite wonderful the difference between the appetites of
successful and unsuccessful lovers,
Mr. Muldoon and Miss M'Anaspie during the progress of the
meal became fast friends, at least so ft would seem, for they
bandied, unchecked, pleasantries of a nature usually only
allowed amongst intimate friends. Both Jerry and his wife were
much amazed, for both stood somewhat in awe of the great man
with whom they would never have attempted to make any
familiarity.

By the time tho heavy part of the eating was done, the whole
assemblage was in hearty good humour.
Katey began to clear away the things, having given the baby
in charge to her mother-in-law. The moment she began, however, 
Mary and Jane started up and insisted that they should
do the work, and on her showing signs of determination forced
her into the arm-chair, and placed the two sweethearts on guard
over her, threatening them with various pains and penalties in
event of their failing in their trust.
Seeing the other girls at work, Miss M‘Anaspie insisted on
helping also, and they were too kind-hearted not to make her
welcome in the little kindly office.
The next addition to the working staff was Mr. Muldoon,
who, to the astonishment of every one who knew him, clamored
loudly for work, evidently bent on going wherever Missy
M'Anaspie went, and on helping her in her every task.
It was a sight to see the great man work, He evidently felt
that he was extending and being more friendly with his inferiors
than, perhaps, in justice to his own position he
was warranted in doing ; and he took some pains to let every
one see that he was playing at work. His ignorance of the
simplest domestic offices was preternatural. He did not know
how to carry even a plate without putting it somewhere he ought
not, or spilling its contents over some one; and he managed to
break a tumbler and two plates just to show, like Beaumarchals
and the watch, that that sort of thing was not in his line.
Mrs. Jerry did not know Pope's lines about the perfection of
a woman's manner end temper, wherein he puts as the culmination 
of her virtues,
" And mistress of herself though china fall ;”
but she had the good temper and the good manner of nature,
which is above all art, and although, woman-like, the wreck of
her household gods went to her heart, she said nothing, but
looked as sweet as if the breakage pleased her.
Truly, Jerry O'Sullivan had a sweet wife and a happy home.
Prosperity seemed to be his lot in life.

Chapter II.—-To And Fro. 
When all was made comfortable for the after sitting, the conversation 
grew lively. The position of persons at table tends to
further cliquism, and to narrow conversation to a number of
dialogues, and so the change was appreciated.
The mont didactic person of the company was Mr. Parnell,
who was also the greatest philosopher ; and the idea of general
conversation seemed to have struck him. He began to comment
on the change in the style of conversation.
" Look what a community of feeling does for us, Half an 
hour ago, when we were doing justice to Mrs. O'Sullivan’s good
things, all our ideas were scattered. There was, perhaps, enough
of pleasant news amongst us to make some of us happy, and
others of us rich, if we knew how to apply our information ; but
still no one got full benefit, or the opportunity of fall benefit,
from it.
Here Price whispered something in Jans's ear, which made
her blush and laugh, and tell him to “go along.”
Parnell smiled and said gently—
“Well, perhaps, Tom, some of the thoughts wouldn’t interest 
the whole of us.”
Tom grinned bashfully, and Parnell reverted to his theme.
He was a great man at meetings, and liked to talk, for he knew
that he talked well.
" Have any of you ever looked how some rivers end?”
‘What end?” asked Mr, Muldoon, and winked at Miss
M'Anaspie,
"The sea end. Look at the history of a river, It begins by
a lot of little streams meeting together, and is but small at
first, Then it grows wider and deeper, ‘till big ships mayhap
can sail in it, and then it goes down to the sea.”
“ Poor thing,” said Mr. Muldoon, again winking at Margaret.
“ Ay, but how doos it reach the seas? It should go, we would
fancy, by a broad open mouth that would send the ships out
boldly on every side and gather them in from every point. But
some do not do so—the water is drawn off through a hundred
little channels, where the mud lies in shoals and the sedges
grow, and where no craft can pass, The river of thought should

4
be an open river—be its craft few or many—if it is to benefit
mankind,” 
Miss M‘Anaspie who had, whilst he was speaking, been whispering 
to Mr. Muldoon, said, with a pertness bordering on
snappishness :
“Then, I suppose, you would never let a person talk except
in company. For my part, I think two is better company than
a lot.”
"Not at all, my dear. The river of thought can flow between 
two as well as amongst fifty ; all I say is that all should
benefit.”
Here Mr. Muldoon struck in. He had all along felt it as a
slight to himself that Parnell should have taken the conversational 
ball into bis own hands. He was himself extremely
dogmatic, and no more understood the difference between
didacticism and dogmatism than he comprehended the meaning
of that baphometic fire-baptism which set the critics of Mr.
Carlyle's younger days a-thinklng.
“For my part,” said he, “I consider it an impertinence for
any man to think that what he says must be interesting to every
one in a room.”
This was felt by all to be a home thrust at Parnell, and no
one spoke. Parnell would have answered, not in anger, but in
good humoured argument, only for an imploring look on Katey's
face, which seemed to say as plainly as words—
“Do not answer. He will be angry, and there will only be a
quarrel.”
And so the subject dropped.
The men mixed punch, all except Mr. Muldoon, who took his
whisky cold, and Parnell, who took none. The former looked at
the latter with a sort of semi-sneer, and said—
“Do you mean to say you don’t take either punch or grog 7”
“Well,” said Parnell, "I didn’t mean to say it, but now
that you ask me I do say it. T never touch any kind of spirit,
and, please God, I never will.”
“Don’t you think,” said Muldoon, "that that in setting
yourself above the rest of us a good deal. We're not too
good for our liquor, but you are. That's about the long and
the short of it.” 
“No, no, my friend, I say nothing of the kind, Any man is
too good for liquor.”
Jerry thought the conversation was getting entirely too argumentative, 
so be cut in— 
“But a little liquor needn’t be bad for a chap if he doesn’t
take too much ?”
“Ay, there it is," said Parnell, “if be doesn’t take too
much. But he does take too much, and the end is that it works
his rain, body and soul.”
"Whose?"
It was Miss M‘Anaspie who asked the question, and it fell like 
a bombshell.
Parnell, however, was equal to the emergency.
“Whose ?” he repeated. " Whose? Everyone's who begins
and doesn’t know where he may leave off.”
Miss M‘Anaspie felt that she was answered, and looked
appealingly at Mr. Muldoon, who at once came to the rescue.
“Everyone is a big word. Do yon mean to tell me that
every man that drinks a pint of beer or a glass of whisky, goes
straight to the devil ?”
“No, no; indeed I do not. God forbid that I should say any
such thing. But look how many men that mean only to take
one glass, are persuaded to take two, and then the wits begin
to go, and they take three or four, and five, ay, and more,
sometimes. Why, men and women”—he rose from his chair
as he spoke, with his face all aglow, with earnestness and belief
in his words, "look around you and see the misery that
everywhere throngs the streets. See the pale, drunken, wasted-
looking men, with sunken eyes, and slouching gait. Men that
were once as strong and hard-working, and upright as any here,
ay, and could look you in the face as boldly as any here, Look
at them now! Afraid to meet your eyes, trembling at every
sound ; mad with passion one moment and with despair the
next."
The tide of his thought was pouring forth with such energy
at no one spoke ; even Mr, Muldoon was afraid at the time
to interrupt him. He went on :

“ And the women, too, God help us all, Look at them and
See what part drink plays in their wretched lives. Listen to
the laughter and the cries that wake the echoes in the streets at
night. You that have wives, and mothers and,” (this with a
glance at Tom and Pat) “sweethearts, can you hear such
laughter and cries and not shudder? If you can, then when
next you hear it think of what it would be for you to hear some
voice that you love raised like that.”
Mr, Muldoon could not stand it any longer and spoke out :
" But come now, I can't see how all the misery and wretchedness 
of the world is to be laid on a simple glass of beer.”
" Hear, hear,” said Miss M‘Anaspie.
Parnell's reply was allegorical. “Do you see how the oak
springs from the acorn—the bird from the egg? I tell you that
if there were no spirits there would be less sin, and shame, and
sorrow than there is.”
“Oh, yes,” said Muldoon. "It would be a beautiful world
entirely, and everybody would have everything, and nobody
Would want nothing, and we'd all be grand fellows. Eh, Miss
Margaret, what do you think t”
Hear, hear,” said Miss M‘Anaspie, more timidly than before, 
however, at the same time looking over at Mrs, O'Sullivan,
who was looking not too well pleased at her.
“Ah, sir,” said Parnell, sadly, “God knows that we, men
and women, are not what we ought to be, and sin will be in the
world, I suppose, till the time that is told. But this I say,
that drink is the greatest enemy that man has on earth.”
“ Why, you're quite an enthusiast,” said Mr, Muldoon ; “one
would think you were inspired.”
“I would I were inspired. I wish my voice was of gold, and
that I could make men hear me all over the world, and that I 
could make the stars ring again with cries against the madness
that men bring upon themselves.”
"Upon my life,” said Mr. Muldoon, yon should be on the
stage. You have missed your vocation. By the way, what is
your vocation ?°
"I am a hatter.”
Miss M‘Anaspie blurted out suddenly, “Mad as a hitter,”
and then suddenly got red in the face, and shut up completely
as she saw her employer's eyes fixed on her with a glare almost
baleful in its intensity.
Mr. Muldoon laughed loudly, and slapped his fat knees as he
ejaculated— Brayvo, brayvo. One for his nob—mad as a
hatter. That accounts for the enthusiasm.” Then, seeing a
look of such genuine pain on Katey's face that even his obtuseness 
could not hide from him how deeply he was hurting her,
added—" Of course, Mr. Parnell, I am only joking ; but still
it is not bad—mad as a hatter. Ha, ha !”
No one said anything more, and no one laughed ; and so the
matter was dropped.
Jerry felt that gloom had fallen on the assemblage, and
tried to lift it by starting a new topic.
“Do you know,” said he, “I bad a letter from John
Sabright the other day, and he tells me if you want to make
money England’s the place.”
“ Indeed,” said his mother, satirically.
Going to England was an old “fad” of Jerry’s, and one
which had caused his mother many an anxious hour of thought,
and many a sleepless night.
" Yes,” answered Jerry, "he says there is more work there
than here, and better paid ; and that a man has ten chances for
gettin’ on for one he has here.”
"The one chance often wins when the ten fail,” said Parnell.
"And it’s worse losing ten pounds than one,” added
Margaret.
"And some girls’ tongues are as long as ten,” said” Mrs.
O'Sullivan, who could not bear anything which tended to make
light of her wishes with regard to Jerry, and so determined to
put a stop to Miss M‘Anaspie’s volubility.
Mr. Muldoon, however, came to the rescue.
"And some girls who have been for ten years in misery
and discomfort find sometimes that one year brings them all
They want."
Miss M‘Anaspie put her handkerchief before her face, and
again dead silence fell on the assembly, Parnell broke it,
“ Jerry, put the idea out of your head, You know that you

5
couldn’t go now even If you wanted, and there is no use sighing
for what can’t be."
“I don’t know that,” said Jerry argumentatively, “I could
go now with Katey and the young ones, just as well as if I was
a boy still ; ay, and better, for she would keep me out of harm."
Parnell said with great feeling, "That's right, Jerry ; stick up
for the wife and stick to her too, for she’s worth it. Do you but
keep to your wife, and the home that she will always make for
you, as long as you let her, and you may go when and where
you will, and your hands will find work.”
Katey began to cry. She was still a little delicate, and anything 
which touched her feelings upset her very much. There
was an immediate rush of all the women in the room to comfort 
her.
Jerry offered her some of his punch, but she put the glass
aside, saying— 
“ No, no, dear, I never take it.”
“Come, come,” said Mr. Muldoon, “Mrs. Katey, this will
never do, you must take it. It is good for you.”
“No, it is good for no one.”
“Come now, Mr. Parnell,” said Mr. Muldoon, "don’t you
know a sup of liquor would do her good? Tell her so”
" No, no,” said Katey, “I know myself.”
Parnell spoke—
“I cannot say, but it is good as a medicine, and as a medicine 
one may take it without harm.”
“ Capital thing to be sick sometimes,” said Muldoon, winking
at Tom and Pat, and laughing at his own joke.
Parnell did not like to let a point go unquestioned on a subject
on which he felt deeply, so he answered-
"When you are sick, your wish is to be well again, and the
medicine that seems nice to you when well, is only in sickness
but medicine after all.”
Once more Mr. Muldoon began to get angry, and said, with a
determination to fight the argument a l'outrance—
"Why, man, you would make the world a hell with all your
self-denials, Do you think life would be worth having if every
enjoyment of it, great and little, was to be suppressed. The
world is bad enough, goodness knows, already, without making
a regular hell of it.”
"Hell is a big word.”
"It is a big word, and I mean it to be a big word.”
“Ah, it is like enough to hell already,” said Parnell sadly.
“On account of all the bad spirits,” added Miss M‘Anaspie,
“Laugh, my child, Laugh whilst you may. Heaven grant 
that the day may never come when you cannot laugh at such
thoughts. Ay, truly, the world is hard enough as it is. Bad
enough, and the devil is abroad enough, and too much.”
“Oh, he's on earth, is he ?”
“Yes, Mr. Muldoon, he is, to and fro, he walks always.”
Whilst he was speaking he was drawing in his note-book.
Miss M‘Anaspie got curious to know what he was doing, and
asked him.
In reply he handed her the book.
She took it eagerly, and then passed it on to all the others in
turn.
He had drawn an allegorical picture under which he had
written—" To and Fro.”
The picture represented a road through a moor to a village,
seen lying some distance away, with the spire of its church
shadowed by a passing cloud. The moor was bleak, with, in the
foreground, a clump of blasted trees, and in the distances ruined
horse, On the road two travellers were journeying, both seated
on the same horse—a sorry nag. One of them was booted and 
spurred, and wore a short cloak, a slouched hat, under which
the lineaments showed ghastly, for the face was but that of a
skull. The other, who rode plok-a-back, was clad as the
German romances love to clothe their demon when
he walks the earth, with trunk hose snd pointed shoes,
a long floating cloak, and peaked cap with cock’s feathers. On
his arm he bore a basket full of bottles, and as he clutched his
grisly companion he laughed with glee, bending his head as
men do when their enjoyment is in perspective rather than an
actuality.
From beneath a stone a viper had raised itself, and seemed to
salute the travellers with its forked tongue.

When the picture came into Mrs. O’Sullivan’s hands, she
fixed her spectacles and held it up a little to let the most light
possible fall on it. Then she spoke—
"God bless us and save as, but that's an awful thing, Where
did you sea that, Mr. Parnell ?”
“I never saw it, ma’am, except in my mind, and I see it
there often enough. You, young men, mind the lesson of that
Picture, for it is truth. Death and the devil go together, and
so sure as the devil grips hold of you, death is not far off, you
may be sure, in some form or other, waiting, waiting, waiting.”
Mr. Muldoon saw that the subject of drinking was coming
in again, and said maliciously—
“ And this is all from a glass of beer.”
“Ay, if you will,” said Parnell, "That's how it begins—
that which in the curse of Ireland in our own time ; and which,
so surely as Irishmen will not use the wit and strength that
God has given them, will drag her from her throne.”
Jerry got into the conversation:
“ One thing John Sebright tells me, that there is less drunkenness 
in England than here.”
" Don't you believe him,” said Parnell. “That man means
mischief to you. Hoe wants to entice you to England, and then
live on you when he gets you there, For Heaven’s sake put
that idea of going away out of your head. You're very well
here as you are; and let well alone.”
Jerry’s mother spoke also, "John Sebright is a nice chap to
quote sobriety as a virtue, Do you remember how often I gave
you money to pay his fines to keep him out of prison after his
drunken freaks, for the sake of his poor dead and gone mother.
Why, that chap could no more tell truth than he could work,
and that’s saying a good deal.”
“Well, drink or no drink, mother, England’s a grand place,
anyhow, and there's lots of money going there.”
Parnell rose up from his chair and said severely—" Jerry
O'Sullivan, do you know what you are talking about? True,
that England is rich, but is money all that a man is to seek
after? If the good men leave poor Ireland to makes little more
money for themselves, what is to become of her ? Is it not as if she
was sold for money ; and if you look at the real difference of
wages—the wages that good sober men that can work, get here
and there, a poor price she would be sold for after all.”
_ “I don't like that way of putting it,” said Jerry, rather
testily. "In fact I have almost made up my mind to go, and I
| don’t think I'm selling my country at all at all, and I wish you
wouldn’t say such things,”
Parnell said nothing for a few moments, Then ho tore the
picture out of his note-book and handed it to him, saying—
“Jerry, old boy, if you ever do go, keep that in your purse,
and if ever you go to pay for liquor for yourself or others, just
think what it means."
When the party rose up fo go they found that Katey had
been crying quietly, and har oyes were red and swollen.
Jerry O'Sullivan’s home was happy, and bis poor, good little
wife feared a change.
(TO BE CONTINUED.}


THE PRIMROSE PATH.
BY A. STOKER, ESQ.
Chapter III. - An Opening

JERRY O'SULLIVAN’S desire to go to go to England
was no mere transient wish. As has been told, he
had had for years a strong desire to try his fortune
in a country other than bis own ; and although the
desire had since his marriage fallen into so sound
a sleep that it resembled death, still it was not dead but
sleeping.
Deep in the minds of most energetic parsons lies some strong
desire, some strong ambition, or some resolute hope, which unconsciously 
moulds, or, at least, influences their every act. No
matter what their circumstances in life may be, or how much
they may yield to those circumstances for a time, the one idea
remains ever the same. This is, in fact, one of the secrets of
how individual force of character comes out at times. The great
idea, whatever it may be, sits enthroned in the mind, and round
it gather subordinate wishes and resolves, as the feudal nobles
round the King, and so goes on the chain down the whole
gamut of man’s nature from the taming or suppression of his
wildest passions down to the commonplace routine of his daily
life.
And yet we wonder at times to see, when occasion offers, with
what astonishing rapidity certain individuals assert themselves,
and how, when a strange circumstance arises, some new in-
individual arises along with it, aa though the man and the hour 
were predestined for each other.
We need not wonder if we will but think that all along the
man was ready, girt in his armour, resolved In bis cause, and
merely awaiting, although, perhaps, he knew it not, the opportunity 
to manifest himself,
Whilst Jerry had been working—and working so honestly and
well that he was on the high road to success—he never once
abandoned in his secret heart the ides of seeking a wider field for
bis exertion, Truly, Alexander has his prototypes in every age
and country ; and men even try to look ever beyond the horizon
of their hopes, sighing for new worlds when the victories of the
old have been achieved.
From the receipt of Sebright’s letter, Jerry had found the
old wish reviving stronger than ever, He was so prosperous
that the idea of failure in work seemed too far away to be easily
realised ; and his home was so happy that domestic trouble
was absolutely beyond his comprehension.
The holy admonition—" Ye that stand take heed lest ye
fall,” should be ever before the minds of men.
Katey saw her husband's secret wish gradually growing into
a resolve, with unutterable pain ; and tried to combat Jerry's
views but hopelessly. At first he listened, and argued the
matter over fairly in all its aspects, being ever kind-hearted
and tender, and seeming to thoroughly sympathize with her
views ; but as the weeks wore on, he began to take a different
tone, and without losing any of his kindness or tenderness to
express more decided opinions and intentions. The change
was so gradual that even Katey’s wifely love, and the acuteness 
which is the handmaiden of love, could see no cause
for change, nor could mark any time as being the period of a
definite change.
In fact, the masculine resolution was asserting itself over the
feminine, and acting and reacting in itself, but constantly in
the direction of settled purpose.
With the feeling of power which a man of average mental
calibre feels over a women of similar status amongst her own
sex, comes a fuller purpose—a more decided, definite resolve
to the man himself. Thus, Jerry, whilst arguing with his
wife, had been all the time strengthening his own resolve, and
working himself up to the belief that immediate action was
necessary to his success in life.
Wives, be careful how you argue with your husbands, for you
walk on a ridge between two precipices. If you allow a half-formed 
wish to bo the parent of immediate action on your husband’s 
part, without raising a warning voice should you see
danger that he does not, then you do him a wrong which will
surely recoil on your own head and the heads of your children.


But if, on the other hand, you persistently combat with argument 
Wishes which should be furthered or opposed with the
patent truths of the heart’s experience, then you will surely fall,
for you will be fighting reality with vacuity—opposing steel
with air drawn daggers of the fancy.
Katey's position was vary sinful. She felt that her speaking
to her husband was a duty which her wifely vow, as much as
her wifely love, called on her to fulfil ; but at the same time she
felt with that subtle instinct of true love which never errs and
never lies, that she was sapping the foundations of her husband’s
love and weakening the influence which she had over him. Poor
Katey! her lot was a hard one, but she felt—and she was right
-that where duty points the way, then the way must be walked
whatever be the misery of the journey, and wherever the road
may lead. 
Jerry's mother, too, was fretted by her son's determination.
He never spoke of it to her, but he heard it from their mutual
friends, and the very fast of his being reticent on the point caused
Her more pain by raising doubts as to his motive, not only for
going, but concealing his wish from her. Jerry had a two-fold
reason for his silence. Firstly, he did not wish to give her pain,
and thought that by keeping silent on the point she would be
spared at least the agony of looking forward to his departure. In
this, Jerry, like many of his fellows, fell into the same error,
which leads the hunted ostrich to hide its head in the sand—the
error which we make when we think that shutting our eyes means
shutting out the danger which we wish to avoid. Again, Jerry
wished to avoid to himself. 
The analysis of a sensual nature shows two evil qualities,
which, although not always expressed, are, nevertheless, ruling 
powers —obstinacy and cruelty. No master how these qualities
may be counterbalanced by other qualities as good as these are 
Bad, or no matter how they are disguised, these two evil 
powers have here their home. Obstinacy in its hardest light is

the adherence to a line of action begun for its end to be gained
rather than for its duty ; and cruelty is almost its logical consequence, 
for it is by its direct or indirect means that obstacles
are cleared away or points of vantage unworthily gained.
Jerry’s nature was a sensual one, although it had ever been held
in check.
The power of evil has a home in every human heart. In one
it is a palace vast and splendid, so splendid and vast that to
the onlooker there are no dark nooks, no gloomy corners, but
where all is so rich and noble that there is dignity in everything. 
In another it is a shooting-box only visited for motives
of pleasure, In another it is an office where gold and secrecy
are synonymous terms. In another it is. villa. In another a
lowly hut. In Jerry it was the last ; bat no one is to suppose
that because it was a hut, that, therefore, it was unimportant.
The residents in palaces are usually to a certain extent
migratory, but the inhabitants of huts are seldom absentees,
and every Irishman knows that a perpetually resident peasant
is better for a country than a lordly absentee.
Thus Jerry's devil, although living in a small house, was
still always there, and was ever on the spot when opportunities
occurred.
One change-one decided change-came which Katey regretted
exceedingly, and that was in his friendship for Parnell.
Hitherto the two men had been excellent friends, and Jerry’s
success in some little business ventures was largely due to
Parnell’s wise counsel. But now the two men were seldom
together, and the elder one seemed to have lost all his old influence 
over his companion.
Parnell saw the change as well as Katey, and was deeply
grieved. He, however, saw, whilst he saw the change, what
danger there was in alluding to it, and so as he was one of those
men who feel it almost as much a breach of duty to be silent
on certain occasions as to bespeak falsely, wisely kept aloof

and waited for a fitting opportunity for speaking earnestly to
Jerry without the risk of offending him,
Jerry, too, knew of the change in himself, and felt a sort of
hostile indignation with all who opposed openly or tacitly his
determination.
This was the first manifestation of the cruelty of his nature.
His mother was broken-hearted, and in her grief, when
arguing with him, unwisely gave play to her bitterness, and so
hardened up one of the softest spots in his heart. She abused
Sebright also, and, as some of the charges which she brought
against him were manifestly absurd, Jerry took occasion to
think, and to express his thoughts, that they were all absurd.
The devil works through love as well as hatred, and his blows
are more deadly when we who strike and we who bear alike
heed them not.
One day there came a letter from John Sebright, which influenced 
Jerry vitally. It was as follows :—
“Kingfichor Arms, Sundy.
“Dear Jerry—You had better ‘come over here at wanse,
there is a place to sute you in a theatre called the Stanly, where
the wants a carpentre to manage for them ; he must be a good
man or he won't doo, and the wagis is fine, not to say exsiv,
and the place esy and the people nice. you had best tri for it
at wanse, and don’t let the chance slip, or you will be a damd
fool, and not worth gettin’ another. don't let your mother or
your wife keep you back, as the will tri to, for weemen isn't a
able to do bisnis, but men is ; an’ the maneger has a nefew, who
is a friend o' mine an’ a capatle felo, an’ a hed like iren, an’
mony is goin' heer lik water, an’ a man with your hed wood make
a fortin in no tim, which let me no at wanse til I tel the nephew,
which if you give me a £1 tu give him to speek for you, it will
be all rite, and vend the money by return to me, care of Mrs,
Smith, Kingficher Arms, Welbred-street, London, and 1 remane
yours trooly,
“JOHN SEBRIGHT.
"P.S.—-don’t sho this to your wif or mother, or the'l think
I wance to mak you cum, an’ av corse mi motivs is disintrested,
as I'm wel off miself an' quit hapy.
“P.S. 2.—if yon tel the weemen tel them i'm goin' to be
marrid to a good woman ho is very pias an’ charetable an’ wel
off don’t forget the £1."
Jerry was no fool, and very clearly he saw through the
motive of the writer of this precious epistle, but there were
passages in it which interested him deeply. Notwithstanding
the mean selfishness of the man’s thoughts, and the vile
English in which they were expressed, he could not shut his
eyes to certain things which they suggested, chiefly the opening
as theatrical carpenter.
Jerry had never heard of the Stanley Theatre, and even now
had not the ghost of an ides what it was like or of what class;
nevertheless, he could not help-thinking that it might be something 
good. London has a big name, and people who live out
of it have traditionally an idea that everything there is great,
and rich, and flourishing, and happy.
The people who live in it can tell a different story, and point
to hundreds and thousands of the poorest and most wretched
creatures that exist on the face of God's beautiful world—the
world that He has made beautiful, but that man has defaced
With sin.
Jerry was in that state in which a man finds everything
which happens exactly salting bis own views, His eyes—
the eyes of his inner self—were so fall of his project that they 
were incapable of seeing anything but what bore on its advancement. 
He shut his eyes to dangers and defects and difficulties,
and like many another man leaped blindly into tho dark.
Sometimes to leap in the dark ta tho perfection of wisdom
and courage combined ; but this is when the gloom which is
round us is a danger, from which we must escape at any
hazard, and not when we make an artificial night by willfully
abutting our eyes upon the glory of the sun.
Jerry wrote to Sebright, enclosing a Post-office order for one
pound and telling him to lose no time about seeing after the
situation for him.
He said not a word about what he had done, even to poor
little Katey, who saw with the eyes of her love that he was keeping 
something back from her.

It was the first secret of their married life, and the bright
eyes were dim from silent weeping as the little wife rose the
morning after the letter to London was despatched.
Several days elapsed before Jerry got any reply from London ; 
and the interval was an unhappy time for both him and
his wife. Katey'a grief grew heavier and heavier to her since
she had no one to tell it to; and Jerry felt that there was a
shadow between them. He recked not that it was the shadow of
his own selfish desire—the spectre of the future—that stood between 
them.
Katey's lot was hard. Tho sweetest blessing of marriage is
that it halves our sorrows and doubles our joys; and so far as
her present life went Katey was a widow in this respect—but
without the sweet consolation that married trust had never
died.
Jerry's anxiety made the home trouble light. He had, like
most men to whom the world behind the curtain is as unknown	 
as were tho mysteries of Isis to a Neophyte, a strange longing
to share in the unknown life of the dramatic world. Moth-like
he had buzzed around the footlights when a boy, and had never
lost the slight romantic feeling which such buzzing ever inspires.
Once or twice his professional work had brought him within the
magic precincts where the stage-manager is king, and there the
weirdness of the place, with its myriad cords and chains, and
traps, and scenes, and files, had more than ever enchanted him.
The chance now offered of employment was indeed a temptation. 
If be should be able to adopt the now life ha would have
an opportunity of combining his romantic taste and his trade
experience, and would be moreover in that wider field for exertion 
to which he had long looked forward.
And so he waited with what patience be could, and shut his
eyes as close as possible to the growing miseries of his home.
At last a letter came from Sebright, telling him that he had
got the place, and one also from the manager, stating that he
would have to be at work in a fortnight’s time, and stating the
salary, which was very liberal.
Face to face with the situation, Jerry found that the sooner
he told his wife the better. Hoe took the day to think over his
plans, and when he went home in the evening he went prepared
To tell her.
There was about him a tenderness unusual of late—a tenderness 
which reminded Katey of the first days of their married
life and of the time when her first child was born; and so the
little woman's heart was touched, and woman-like she could
not fear, nor oven see troubles in the light of her husband’s
smile. Jerry himself felt the change in her manner, and his
tenderness grow. He took her on his knees, as in their old
courting days, and a few sweet whispered words brought the
colour to her cheek, and the old light into her eyes. Then it
was that Jerry felt how hard was the news which he had to tell,
and he half repented of his resolution. He thought of the
happy home which he was breaking up, and of the anguish of
the little wife and mother who was to be taken away from all
her friends and relatives to begin the world anew amongst
strangers. But the time was come when he must speak, for
to delay would be cruel, and so he began with s huskiness in
his throat which was not usual to him.
" Katey, dear, I've some news for you.”
Katey’s arms tightened round his neck.
“Oh, and good news too, Jerry, I know by your tenderness
to me to-night. Jerry dear, have you given up the wild idea ?"
Jerry did not expect this, and his voice became a little harder
as he replied-
" No, I have not given up the wild idea, as you call it, It is
about it that I want to speak.”
Katey felt the shadow pass between them again, and in spite
of all she could do her eyes filled with tears. She did not wish
to hurt Jerry, however, and turned away her head. But, manlike, 
he would know all that was going on in the mind of his
companion, and, taking her face between his strong hands,
turned it up to the light. As he did so, he saw the tears and
could not help feeling annoyed, for he knew that as yet in the
conversation he had said nothing to warrant the change from
sunshine to rain. So he spoke not unkindly—
" Cryin’ already. Ah, Katey, what do you mean?”
“ Nothin’, Jerry, nethlu', my dear, only I couldn’t help it.

I'm not very strong yet.” She said this with a tender, half shy
glance down at the cradle, which she was rocking with her foot,
that would have turned the heart of savage.
Jerry could not help feeling moved, and clasped her still more
tenderly in his strong arms, and his voice softened—
" Sure, Katey, it's breakin’ my heart I am all day knowin’
how you would take the news. Cry away, darlin’, it'll do you
good, and mayhap the news will make you cry.”
" No, no, Sorry, only talk to me like that, and I'll never
cry—never—never—never.” The little woman's voice went up
in a sweet, half playful crescendo as she reiterated the last words,
and shook aside her tears.
“Then, Katey, I'll tell you. I have got an offer to go to
England”—Katey's face fell—" to London—to become head
carpenter in a theatre, an’ I’ve written to say I'l take it.”
Woman’s nature, when compared with man’s, resembles more
the hare than his does, and her moral eye, like the hare’s eye,
is set far back for seeing the past clearly, whilst it accepts the
future blindly. She accept facts more easily than resolves ;
and when once a thing has been accomplished, and any final
or decisive step taken, the major part of her anxiety is over.
Accordingly Katey heard her husband's resolve with so
equanimity which took him by surprise. She did not cry, although 
her heart felt to herself to sink into her very boots, but
simply drew his bead on her bosom and stroked his hair, saying
fervently—
“ God grant, Jerry, acushla, that it may be for the bast,
May all the saints pray for us both.”
" Amen” said Jerry, and then both remained silent for a 
time.
Soon the woman's curiosity spoke, and her imagination began to
work ; and in the pleasure of expectation of change—always
specially dear to women—she lost sight for a time of her present
trouble. She began to question Jerry about the new engagement, 
and, having once began, poured forth such a tide of
questions that he had no time to answer them, even bad he
known himself all she wanted. He did as well as he could,
however ; and now that the worst of the news was over, her
hopeful nature took the brightest view possible of the case, and
she seemed, by comparison with her mood of the last few days,
Quite happy.
Jerry did not tell her that night of the time of leaving, but
let her sleep with what happiness she could, for he knew that
the morrow, when she had learned the necessary suddenness of
their departure, would be a sad one for her.
In the morning he told her just before going to his work, for
he put off the evil moment, half that she might be able to have
her cry in quietness—he knew that she would cry—and half
with a man's selfish wish to avoid an unpleasant scene.
Katey bore up till he was gone, and then the tide of her grief
and sorrow burst forth unchecked, and she cried so pitifully
that her little ones began to cry from childish sympathy. She
took them in her arms and knelt down with them and rocked
herself and therm to and fro, and moaned—
" Oh, woe the day, oh, woe the day.”

Chapter IV.—The New Life.
Jerry O'Sullivan well knew the differences between the dispositions 
of his wife and his mother; and it was not without a
shrinking of spirit that he approached the dwelling of the latter
that evening to impart the unwelcome news.
His fears were not without foundation, for when he began
to tell his news the old lady who had hitherto been full of love
and affection broke out into a desperate fit of crying, a very
unusual thing with her, mingling her tears with reproaches such
as Jerry had never before heard from her lips.
" And you, my son,” she said, “are about to leave your home,
and your country, and your mother, and to go amongst
strangers. Oh, woe the day, oh, woe the day, that my child
ever wants to leave the ground where his poor dead father lies
sleeping. Oh, Jerry, Jerry, was it for this that I watched over
your youth, and toiled and slaved for you, early snd late, that
when I saw you grow into a strong, steady, honest man, with a
sweet wife and a happy home, I should see you leave me for
over."
Jerry interrupted. “ Not for ever, mother.”

" Ay, ay, for ever. Wirrasthrue, wirrasthrue. Sure, don’t
I know I'll never see your face again. You're goin’, Jerry,
among strangers, an” their ways are not our ways, and amongst
them you'll forget the lessons of your home. You're goin’ to a
city where the devil lives, if he lives any one place in the world ;
and I must sit at home here and doubt, and sigh, and weep, and
weep, till I die.”
“Mother, dear, don’t take on like this, Why should you
doubt, and sigh, and weep at all, at all ? I amn’t goin’ to do
anything wrong. I'm goin’ to work harder than ever, an' I
think, mother—I do think that it's not fair to me to think that
Im goin’ to go to the devil, just because I leave one town to
live in another.”
But reason and consolation were alike thrown away on Mrs.
O'Sullivan. The spice of obstinacy in her nature, and which
Jerry had inherited from her, made her stick to her point ; snd
so after many efforts Jerry came away leaving her bowed
down with sorrow. He was himself somewhat indignant—and
with fair enough reason—that all his relatives should take it for
granted that he was going to change an honest hardworking life
or an idle dissolute one.
He did not like to go home at once, for he somehow felt afraid
of meeting a reproachful look on Katey's face. This fear was a
proof that he know in his secret heart that he was doing wrong,
for in all their married life Katey had never once given him cause
for such thought ; it was in his own conscience that the reproach
arose ; and the look was on the face of his angel.
Accordingly, he made a detour and called at the house of Mr.
Muldoon. The great man was within and received him heartily.
“Why, O'Sullivan,” said he, "this is quite unexpected. Sit
down, man, and make yourself comfortable.”
Jerry sat down, but was anything but comfortable. Whilst
he was on the way to his home, he had felt a desire to stay away,
but now that he was settled down he longed to be at home.
Katey’s face, pale with her recent sickness, and paler still from
her recent grief, seemed to look at him, and he thought and felt
how her poor heart must be beating as she waited and waited for
his return, counting the minutes, and finding in each moment's
extra delay new causes for dread. At last he could stand it no
longer and jumped up, saying to his host :
" I can’t stay. I have not been at home yet, and Katey will be
expecting me.”
Muldoon laughed.
“There's a man with three children! Sure, a wife in her
honeymoon wouldn’t look for you like that.”
" Katey would, and does. No, indeed, I can’t stay. I just
came to tell you that I have got an engagement in the Stanley
Theatre, in London, as carpenter, and I am going in less than a
fortnight.”
Mr. Muldoon whistled.
" This is sudden,” he said.
" Ay," said Jerry, but said no more.
“ You must come and spend an evening with me before you
go, and your mother will come and Marg——, Miss M‘Ansaple ;
and we'll get the boys and girls and have great fun.”
" Agreed,” said Jerry, and took his leave.
When he got home Katey flew to the door to meet him, and
clung to him and kissed him, and he wondered how he could be
such a fool as to stop away for fear of any reproach from her.
He told her of his visit to his mother and Mr, Muldoon, and of
the invitation of the latter, which she agreed should be
accepted.
The next week was such a busy one that neither Jerry nor
Katey had much time for repining, and even Mrs. O’Sullivan
found some consolation in her exertions and the liberal preparations 
which she was making for her son's departure. At first
there was some question as to the advisability of Katey and the
children going at once, as some of the family thought that it
would be better if Jerry went alone and Katey waited to follow
when all was comfortably settled for her. Katey herself had,
however, put a stop at once to the discussion.
“I don't want comfort,” she said, "end I amn’t afraid to
rough it since we are to go; but I want to be with Jerry.”
Her mother-in-law backed her up in this view, and so the
matter was arranged.
Mr. Muldoon's entertainment was a great affair. No expense

had been spared on the host's part, and no trouble on the part
of his servant ; and the consequence was an amount of splendour
which dazzled all beholders.
The entertainment was given in the drawingroom over the shop,
a room seldom entered save by the servant, who periodically
dusted it. The covers had been taken off the chairs which now
showed their red cushions in all their splendour. The yellow
gauze had been removed from the mirror, the picture frames,
and the gaseller, which no longer presented its habitual appearance— 
that of an immense jelly bag, through which yokes of
egg have passed. The eating and drinking was on a scale of
magnificence. Not only had the warehouse been ransacked for
its delicacies, but good things of, so to speak, an alien description 
had beer provided, and so far as the inner-man was concerned 
nothing was wanting. The company was the same as
that at the christening party, with the addition of a couple of
hard dry old men, of whom Mr. Muldoon thought much, and
to whom he paid decided deference.
When all the company had assembled, which was about seven
o’clock, Mr. Muldoon ordered supper, and all went vigorously
to work. Hitherto there had been a little stiffness. Price and
Carey had been somewhat awed by Mr. Muldoon’s magnificence,
and their sweethearts, seeing this, had followed their lead, and
remained in seemingly bashful silence. Jerry and Katey, and
Mrs, O'Sullivan, and Parnell, were too heavy-hearted for mirth,
and so the only members of the party who were lively, were the
host and Miss. M‘Ansaple.
The latter was anything but sorrowful, and truly with good
cause. She saw with the instinct of her sex that she had made
a conquest in the rich old bachelor, and already tasted possession 
of all the splendour which surrounded her. She was even
now, whilst she pretended to admire, planning changes in the
room and its furniture. The chairs would not be arranged as at
present, the pictures were too gloomy, and would have to be
replaced by others of brighter hue—in fact, altogether much
additional splendour would have to be imported, so that all her
friends and visitors would be driven to the wildest envy without
giving them a chance of escape.
When the supper was done, Mr. Muldoon stood up and made
a speech reverting to Jerry's departure, and wishing him
success, and also managing to bring in a neat compliment to
Miss M'‘Anaspie's good looks, which caused that bashful young
female to hide her face in her pockethandkerchief and to giggle
for some minutes. Before he sat down he said, and said it
pointedly—
“The last meeting of a festive description at which we all
assisted was, I think, somewhat spoiled by various discussions.
Now, I hope that to-night we will have no such discussions. I
wish that our friends, Jerry and Katey, may have an evening
all jolly and merry.”
“Hear, hear,” said the old men, simultaneously.
Parnell felt that all this was levelled at him, and found his
hands tied. There was no discussion of any kind, and as
nothing more than casual remarks were made, the party soon
took a tone so gloomy that even the lively Margaret found her
spirits below zero. All this tended to irritate Mr, Muldoon.
A man of his temperament gets dogmatic in proportion to his
irritation, and consequently he soon was laying down the law on
every imaginable point.
This still more increased the gloom till all was so deadly that
Katey could bear it no longer, and left earlier than she had intended. 
The rest were not slow to follow her example, and
Mr, Muldoon was so enraged at the miserable failure of his
merry party that he would hardly say good night.
The days drew on towards their departure, and all were so
busy that there was no time for thought—perhaps just as wall
for those of them that had hearts to feel.
At last the day arrived, and their friends assembled at the
North-wall to see them off, for they were going by sea on
account of their luggage, which was quite disproportionate to
their rank in life. The anguish of parting was very great, and
the tears shed many. But partings must over be, and this one
was like all that have gone before and all that are to follow after.
So great was the grief of all that Jerry for a time repented of his
determination.

And so Jerry O'Sullivan and hie wife and children left home
and fortune to seek greater fortune in a strange place,
The voyage lasted three days. For the first twenty-four
hours Katey was too sick to think, and the poor children
suffered dreadfully ; and it was not till the black bare rocks of
the Land's End came into view that the poor little woman was
able to look about her. Even the first glimpse of her future
country was not reassuring, for it looked very black and cheerless 
and inhospitable indeed.
However, by the time Falmouth, with its houses clustered up
the hill, and its quaint, quiet, old-world look still upon it, came
in sight, her spirits rose. From thence the journey was enjoyed
by all, for the weather was fine and the sea like glass. The
south coast of England is full of charming scenery, which one
sees much of in passing from port to port, and it was no wonder
that Jerry and his wife felt somewhat elated at being amongst
such wealth and security as the disposition of things there presupposed. 
Plymouth, the queen of ports, with its wealth of
naval strength and its picturesque batteries on Mound Edge-
combe, Drake Island, and the Hoe; and Portsmouth, guarded
by iron-clad towers out in the very sea, miles of continuous
batteries and innumerable war-ships, made a deep impression,
and somehow Katey felt that Jerry was a cleverer man than she
had given him credit for being.
It is the nature of the greater to absorb the lesser. We see
the beauty of the rose in fall luxuriance in the summer sunlight ; 
it is only when we reach the core that we find the canker
worm.
At last the Thames was reached, and the O'Sullivans were
fairly awed by the strength of the defences. All up the river,
which took them the best part of a day to ascend, the banks
were studded with forts on either side. Little low-lying forts,
all fronted with iron, dangerous places, very hard to bit from
any distance away, but able to contain the best and biggest guns
made in the world ; the black iron-cased ports, in rows seemingly 
level with the water's edge, looked like the iron doors of
the vaults in a cemetery, a fact which, in the eyes of the onlookers, 
added not a little to the grim terror of their appearance.
The wonder culminated at Tilbury, for here two immense forts
defended the narrowest part of the river, and made the idea of
any hostile force passing up it a complete impossibility.
London was reached at last. Busy, bustling, rushing, hurrying 
London, compared with which all other cities seem as the
castle of the sleeping princess in the fairy tale; and Jerry and
his wife, on landing from the steamer, albeit they came from a
city where Progress speaks with no puny voice and works with
no lazy hand, felt bewildered.
At the best of times and places a landing-stage is no flower
garden, especially to the incomer; but the London landing-
stages. with their great steam-cranes and palatial warehouses,
and ships lying seven or eight deep out into the river, are
wonders in themselves. It was only by patience, and care, and
asking many questions that Jerry was able to bring his family
into the wholly terrestial world.
Through much bustling, scrambling, and exertion, they found
their way into the street where the theatre was situated, for as
they knew nothing about the place Jerry thought it best to get
as near to his work as he could. He had high resolves, and
intended to work harder even in the new life than in the old.
The neighbourhood was exceedingly poor, and an amount of
misery and squalor prevailed which showed Katey in as many
moments as the other had taken hours that all was not gold
which glittered within the strip of silver sea which her sons
call Britain’s bulwarks, but that the greatness, and wealth,
and strength, have their counterfoils in crime, and poverty,
And disease.
More than an hour was spent in looking for lodgings, and towards 
Katey's heart was sick and sore. There was some vital objection
to every place. One was too dear, another was too dirty, a third,
was too small, and so on.
All things have an end, even looking for lodgings, and towards
nightfall they lighted on a place, which, although not exactly
what they required, was still the nearest approach to it that they
had yet come across. It was over a green-grocer’s shop, and
promised to be fairly comfortable. Katey, somehow, felt that
the mere show of green stuff gave it a little of the idea of home—

just enough, she found out afterwards, to make her home sickness, 
which had worn somewhat away during the last day or
two, come back again.
However, she had no time for brooding over sorrows, real or
sentimental. The children were dead tired and crying with
sleep, and so when a fire was lit, and the basket of provisions
opened, they were tucked into their bad and fell asleep in a
moment.
Whilst Katey was thus attending to her household duties,
Jerry was exercising his professional skill in making the room
comfortable, knocking up nails here and there, and generally
improving the disposition of affairs. Both had finished about
the same time, and then Katey made the tea, and the husband
and wife sat down to chat, she sitting on his knee as all loving
little wives love to sit.
Jerry now felt face to face with the realities of his new life,
and the prospect was not at all cheering. He missed the
comforts of home, and felt, in spite of his strong wilful self-belief 
which deadens a mind like his to many outward miseries,
that he was but an atom in the midst of the world around
him—a grain of sand in that great desert which men call
London. Katey was more cheerful, for a wife carries with her
husband and children her true home which rests as securely in
her heart as a snail's-house on his back. Katey slept that
night, for she was tired out, but Jerry could not sleep.
In the morning he was stirring by daylight, and after
lighting the fire, for Katey was so worn out that she still slept,
went out to look about the nelghbourhood. It was still so early
that but few people were up. He found his way to the theatre,
whose external appearance filled him with consternation. The
outside of a small theatre is at the best of times unpromising,
and this one looked, in the cool morning air, squalid in the
extreme.
Jerry wandered round it curiously trying to get every possible
view. As it went back into a large block of buildings, this was
no sort of easy task ; and so by the time the survey was completed 
he was quite ready for his breakfast.
Katey was up and as bright as a bee. The ohildren had
recovered their good temper in their sleep, and everything was
infinitely more cheerful than had seemed possible for it ever to
be the night before.
Katey came up to her husband as he entered the room and
put her arms round his neck and kissed him several times very,
very fondly.
“God bless our future life, Jerry, dear," she said, "I hope
it will always be as happy as this. If I can do it be sure your
home will always be a cheerful and happy one.”
He kissed her in return, feeling more deeply than he cared
to say, for there was arising lump in his throat.
The morning passed in setting things straight, and in the
afternoon Jerry went down to the theatre again. The place
looked more lively than before, although in reality still very
dismal. There were a few of those nondescript, ill-clad
loungers that are only seen in the precincts of theatres, hanging
round the door—those seedy specimens of humanity who are
the camp-followers of the histrionic army.
When Jerry asked one of them where he would find the
manager, he winked at his companions, rubbed his lips, and
said, with obsequious alacrity—
“This way, sir. Come with me and I'll show you the way."
Jerry followed him through several dark passages filled with
innumerable boxes of all sizes—old woodwork and portions of
scenic ornamentation half covered with tarnished gilding, till
they reached a door, to which the guide pointed, saying—
“Its a very dry day, your honour.” 
“ Very dry,” said Jerry.
" A drop would not be bad, sir.”
Jerry's appearance was so good that the man called him sir,
not all for the purpose of flattering his small vanity.
Jerry gave him twopence, and knocked at the door.
He was told to come in, and on doing so found the manager
who was just going out, and who, being in a hurry, told him to
come to him next morning to talk over his duties, and in the
meantime to see the stage-manager, Mr. Griffin, who would
show him over the place, so that he might get accustomed to it.
Jerry managed to find his way to the stage, which was lit by

a great line of gas-jets on the top of a vertical pipe, like a hayrake, 
stuck at the back of the orchestra. A dress rehearsal was
going on, and Jerry stood in the wing to watch. The play was
a version of Faust, and the dresses were the same as those used
in Gounod’s opera. Presently, Mr. Griffin noticed the strange
face, and came over to the wing. Jerry told him his name, and
was at once welcomed as a member of the staff. He was introduced 
to several people on the stage with whom he was likely
to come in contact. Amongst the actors was a tall individual
who was performing the part of " Mephistopheles,” who came
over to Jerry and introduced himself, saying that he knew John
Sebright. Jerry was glad to see anyone who had the tie of a
mutual friend amongst so many strange faces, and, although he
did not like the appearance of his new friend, spoke to him
heartily.
Whenever he had an opportunity during the course of the
rehearsal he came over to Jerry and resumed their chat. Presently
he came over and said—
"I am not on in this scene. Come and have a glass of beer
with me.”
"With pleasure,” said Jerry, for he was hot and thirsty,
and the twain adjourned to a little tavern across the street,
Mons, the new friend, calling into his dressing room to put on
his Ulster coat, so that his stage dress would not be observed.
When they entered the tavern the bar-keeper was busy
settling his glasses, and had his back turned to them. Mons
took off his Ulster and sat down, there being no one but themselves 
present except a drunken shoemaker, whom Mons knew,
and a beggarman who followed them in.
When the bar-keeper turned round Jerry met the most repulsive 
face he had ever seen—a face so drawn and twisted,
with nose and lips so eaten away with some strange canker, that
it resembled more the ghastly front of a skull than the face of a
living man. Jerry was shocked, but in the meantime Mons
called for the beer, which was brought and soon drank.
Mons then said—
“ Grinnell, this is our new carpenter.”
" Glad to see you, sir. Welcome to London. I understand
you're Irish. You beat us there in one thing, at all events.”
“What is that ?” said Jerry.
“Your whisky. We can get none like it; but I tell you
what, I'll give you some liquor you never tasted, I'll be bound.
And as you're a stranger I'll make it a present to you.”
"No, no,” sald Jerry. ‘
“ Take it," whispered Mons, “ He'll be offended if you
don’t.”
Grinnell produced a bottle of labelled "Gift” from the shelf,
and poured out two half tumblers full and handed one to each.
“Thats what I give for my hansel,” said Grinnell, ‘ What
do you think of it?”
“Capital,” said Jerry, after tasting ft, “' What is it called.
I see 'Gift' on the bottle?”
“No, that's not its name. I put that on ft to show my
customers that when I-give it I mean civility and not commerce.
It’s a decoction I make myself.”
Just then a boy ran across from the theatre and said—
“Mr. Mons, you're wanted. Your scene is on.”
Mons tried to put his hand into his pocket, but could not as
his tights had no pockets. He said to Jerry as he went out—
“I'v got no money with me. Will you pay for the beer and
I'll give it you when you come back to the theatre,”
"All right,” said Jerry, and he took out her purse.
As he opened it he saw Parnell's picture, and then it struck
him that his new life was beginning but badly, drinking in the
middle of the day.
He paid the money and went quickly out of the public-house 
without looking behind him.
(TO BE CONTINUED.)

THE PRIMROSE PATH.
BY A. STOKER, Esq.
Chapter IV.—How tHe New Life Began.
WHEN Jerry got back to the theatre the place 
did not somehow look the same ; there was too 
much tarnished gilding, he thought, and too little 
reality. Although the place seemed very old and 
dirty—so old and so dirty that after looking about
him for a little time he felt that there was room and opportunity 
for all his skill and energy—there was something so
cheering in this prospect of hard work that he forgave the dirt
and the age, and longed to get into active service.
The rehearsal did not take much longer, and then the various
actors and employee dispersed. Mons came over to Jerry and
asked him to come to his dressing-room for a moment, Jerry
was anxious to get home, and said so.
" You need not fear,” said Mons, "I shan’t detain you a
minute. I only want to give you what you paid for me."
“ Nonsense, man,” said Jerry, who felt almost insulted, for,
like all Irishmen, he had one virtue which too often leans to
vise’s side—generosity, and considered that hospitality was
involved in the question of " who pays?”
Of all the silly ideas that ever grew in the minds of a people,
feeding on their native generosity of disposition, this idea is
the most silly. Let any man but think honestly how honour or
hospitality can be involved in the mere payment of a few pence,
and then ask himself the question in his heart of what difference
there is to him between the nobler virtues of his soul and the
pride of superabundant coinage. Jerry O'Sullivan was no fool,
and often reasoned with himself on the subject ; but still the
prejudice of habit was too strong within him to be easily overcome, 
and so he felt hurt in spite of his reason, Mons answered
him suavely— 
“No nonsense at all. I borrowed a small sum of money off
you, which you kindly lent me. I now wish to repay you.”
“Sure there isn’t need of repayment because I paid for a
glass of beer.”
“But a debt is a debt, large or small, and I don't want to
remain due to any man.”
Jerry thought for a moment or two. The justness of the
statement struck him go forcibly that he felt that any farther
talk- would be unfair to his friend; so answered simply—
“Fair enough,” and took the money proffered, thinking to
himself what a good-hearted, honest fellow his now friend was.
It was well nigh dark when Jerry got home. He found
Katey up to her eyes in work; for between settling the rooms
and unpacking, and looking after the children and the supper,
she had quite enough to do. She had given the rooms a thorough 
cleaning—a thing very much required—and as they had
not quite recovered from the effects, were not so comfortable
as they might have been. The floors still presented that patchy
appearance which newly-washed woodwork always assumes ; and
even the bright fire was not able to quite overcome the idea of
damp thus suggested.
Nevertheless, the change even to unfinished cleanliness was
pleasant after the unutterable grime of the theatre; and Jerry
felt how pleasant was the idea of home, albeit he regretted in
the core of his heart that his real home—the place where he
was born and bred—was far away.
Katey bustled about ; and soon the supper was ready, and in
its consumption things began to assume a pleasanter aspect. All
were tired and went to bed early. 
In the morning Jerry was up early and round the neighbourhood 
looking about him. Theatrical life, save on occasions,
begins late, even for the subordinates, and Jerry’s services were
not required till an hour which, when compared with his
habitual hour for going to work, seemed to him to be closer to
evening than morning. At the time appointed he was waiting
to see the manager, who did not appear, however, till more
than an hour after his engagement. Jerry waited with impatience 
for his coming. To a man habitually as well as naturally
active in occupation, nothing is so tiresome as that of waiting :
it is only the drones in the hive of life that enjoy idleness in the
midst of others’ work.

It is the misery of all those whose work is connected with the
Arts that there is a spice of uncertainty in everything. It would
seem as if Providence had decreed that those who soar above
the level of commonplace humanity should bear with them some
counterbalancing weakness to show them that they are but of
the level after all. The ancients showed this idea by an allegory
in the story of him who, with wings of wax, thinking himself no
longer a mortal, but a god, flew close to the sun till the waxon
pinions melted, and he fell prone.
Jerry was in no good humour at the end of his long wait, and
more than once the ides occurred to him-that a theatre was a
very dry place. Fortunately, however, he was afraid to leave
his post, or else Mr, Grinnell might have benefitted by his
thirst.
When the manager, Mr. Meredith, came in he spoke to Jerry
in an off-hand way, telling him what his duties would be, and
what his salary ; that he should be always up to time; that he
should keep his subordinates in good order, and so forth ; and
ended by sending him off to Mr. Griffin to find out the details
of his work.
Mr. Griffin was available, for the rehearsal of the day was
only that of a stock piece, whose management he could trust to
the hands of the prompter. He went right over the stage with
Jerry, showing him the various appliances and their manner of
use, Jerry's practiced mind at once took to what was required
in each case, and he saw his way to many improvements, to
execute which his hands itched. The new style of work was
not a little confusing, however, and the names of the different
things got so mixed up that when he was asleep that night Jerry
kept dreaming of slots, and Ales, and wings, and flats, and vampire 
traps, and grooves, and P, S, (prompt side), and O. P.
(opposite prompt side), all which got jumbled together and
puzzled him not a little. He was not required at the theatre in
the night time for a couple of days, and so spent tho evenings
at home.
At last he got regularly to work, and began his task of reorganisation, 
commencing by trying a general cleaning up. After
half-an-hour's work he was astonished. He could not have
believed that any place could be so dirty, or that such a pile of
dust and rubbish of every kind could have been accumulated
into the space from which the pile before him had been removed.
In the cleaning process he had got so dry that he found it necessary 
to have a drink, and accordingly he went to corner of the
cellar, where there was a tap, to get some water. As he was
about to drink, Mons, who had fallowed him, spoke—
" You don’t mean to say you're drinking water at this time
of day?"
"Bedad I am. I've the thirst of the lost upon me,” and
Jerry raised his hands, of which he had made a bowl, to his lips.
Mons gave him a shove, which spilled the water.
"Don’t be an ass, man," he said. Have a glass of beer, or
try Barclay and Perkins.”
" What is Barclay and Perkins ?”
" Entire.”
" Entire ! what do you mean ?”
“ I mean, my dear O'Sullivan, that you are green as your
Emerald Island. Barclay and Perkins are two great philanthropists 
who aid suffering humanity by brewing a delicious
liquid called ' Entire.’ ”
" Oh, I see, they're the London Guinness.” 
Mons laughed satirically. " Exactly,” he said. He could not
fancy any one judging of anything except by a London standard
of comparison. In the meantime Jerry was getting more thirsty
than ever, and, on Mons renewing his invitation, he went with
him to Grinnell’s, to see, as the latter suggested, " whether
Ireland was equal to England in brewing or not.” 
As they were leaving the theatre Mons stopped and said—
" Hold on a moment, wait here—or stay, wait for me over
there. I want to go up to my dressing-room to get some money:
Jerry accordingly went across alone to the public-house.
As he opened the door his ears were greeted by sounds of
strife—curses both loud and deep, falling furniture and breaking
glaze, and the souffling and trampling of angry feet ; added to
these was the ceaseless yelping of a dog.
Jerry pushed open the door hastily and entered the house. 
The sight which met his eyes was not a pleasant one to a peacably-disposed

man. Two men were struggling in the centre of
the room with all the intensity end ferocity of wild beasts.
They were not fighting “fair,” in the ordinary acceptance of
the term, but were clutching wildly at each other's throats and
hair, and were trying to scratch as much as to hit. The strife
evidently sprang from no desire of mastery, but was the outcome 
of hatred, deadly, no far as it went. Close by them a
small table overturned, and a scattered pack of cards spoke
volumes as to the origin of the hatred. A wretched-looking dog,
whose foot had bean trodden on in the scuffle, limped under the
bar, yelping. The only element of calmness in the room was
supplied in the person of Grinnell, who, conspicuous in his white
shirt sleeves, with large cuffs aid gorgeous links, leaned over
his bar, complacently, resting his head on his hands and biting
the tops of his fingers in quiet enjoyment of the scene. He
knew from experience that a little emeute of this kind was in no
wise to be discouraged, for it always ended in “drinks all
round,” an ending of which he, as a professional man, highly
approved.
Jerry could not bear fighting. He had in himself, somewhere
hidden below the outer crust of his nature, a spark of warlike
fire which his conciousness told him should not be fanned into
flame, and so, whilst his head remained clear and his reason
worked, he dreaded that which he felt in his heart was dangerous. 
He was, however, an energetic man ; and it is not natural
to the energetic to stand by inactive whilst strife is being carted 
on, Accordingly, he rushed over to separate the combatants.
The part of peacemaker is a noble one, and one which no
man worthy of the name should shrink from on account of its
unpleasantnesses, difficulties, or dangers ; but it has its own
trials. The natural impulse of two animals, human or otherwise, 
when interrupted in combat is to both turn on the
aggressor ; and the experience of any man will tell him how
marked is this characteristic in the human animal. Jerry know
this as well as most men, for, being a quiet and temperate man
the burden of peacemaking fell on his shoulders more often
than on those of most of his fellows.
He was not prepared, however, for the storm which fell upon
him in this case. One of the combatants caught him by the
hair, at which he dragged so savagely that, half to be free from
the exquisite pain which it caused him, and half to end the
struggle quickly, Jerry was obliged to clutch him by the throat.
Having so caught him, Jerry was comparatively safe so far as
this too was concerned, for with his powerful thumb upon his
throat and able to hold him at arm’s length, the struggle was a
matter of moments. He was not sorry for this, for he saw that
his opponent was none other than John Sebright, who, however, 
did not seem to recognise him.
But in the meantime the second gambler was quite free and
able-to work out his purpose unchecked. What that purpose
was Jerry had reason to remember for many a long day, for the
man, who was a stoutly-built fellow enough, snatched up a chair,
and holding it by the leg in both hands, struck him over the
head with it.
Jerry fell quite senseless just in time to be seen by Mons as
he entered the door.
The sight of a man on the floor seemingly dead, save
that he was bleeding copiously, called both the combatants to 
themselves, and instinctively they stopped and looked at him
and at each other. Mons ran over and joined the group ; and
Grinnell, seeing that matters bad gone a little too far, and
fearing that his house would get a bad name, hurried out from
behind his bar cursing and swearing and making a great fuss.
His first care was business. He was afraid of losing the
custom of Jerry's victor by giving him offence, and equally
afraid of getting into trouble if he did not take some active
step against him ; accordingly, he took a medium course, and
coming close to him whispered :
" You had better out, In case of a row."
The man nodded, and taking up his coat and hat harried out
of the place.
Grinnell proceeded to act the part of the good Samaritan to
Jerry, with, however, the difference that he forced the wine
into his mouth instead of his out. It takes a great deal to knock
the senses out of a man for long, and Jerry’s temperate life and

healthy physique stood him in good stead. In a couple of
minutes he opened his eyes, and seeing a lot of strange tacos
round him started into a sitting posture. The effort made his
head throb, and be put his hand to it. Then he felt something
strange and clammy, and looking at his hand to see what it was
saw it covered with blood. This gave him a shock, which,
although it made him feel sick, still further aroused him, and
he stood up. He was a little weak and his head was swimming, so
that he clutched at the stretched hands round him to steady
himself.
By-and-bye he got better, and measures were taken to stop 
the bleeding of the cut in his head. He did not like the dressing
of the rough unskilled hands, and went off to a neighbouring
apothecary to have the wound properly attended to. Sebright
had vanished from the house at an early stage of the proceedings.
All this took some time, so that when Jerry got home it was
past his appointed hour, and the dinner was nearly spoiled
in spite of poor Kate's efforts. In order to prevent Katey
from seeing the wound, he pretended to be in a hurry to get
back to his work and kept on his cap. Katey noticed that he
was looking pale, and cautioned him against working too hard
and going into places that were not healthy. Jerry smiled,
kissed her, and went back to his work.
He was not able to do much, however, for after the rest he
began to feel the real effects of the blow. He tried to work as
before, but could not, and at one time got so faint that one of
his men went out for some brandy, which freshened him up a
bit, so that he tried to work again. Again he failed, and this
time almost fainted, and again the brandy-and-water cure was
resorted to. Jerry was temperate man, and the liquor thus
taken at an unusual time began to have effect on him. This
made him angry, for be felt it, and having, as is known, a
strong spice of obstinacy in his nature, determined not to give
in to it. Therefore, instead of lying down, as Mr, Griffin, who
was present, wanted him to do, he insisted in going about and
talking to every one, and generally laying for himself the foundation 
of a bad name and much distrust, for men never can have
the same confidence in a man when they have once sen him off
his head as they had when his wits were intact. Mons took
advantage of his condition to induce him to pay Grinnell
another visit, for the purpose, he said, of showing the poor
man that he bore him no malice for the row that had occurred
in his house. Jerry was in that state when a man thinks that
to say “yes” to everything is meritorious, and, having shaken
Mons' hand several times in succession, they both adjourned
over the way, followed by a little train of the hangers-on, who
scented a "free liquor” for themselves out of all this ultra-friendliness. 
In the public-house they found Sebright and his sometime
enemy engaged in a game of cards. They had both returned
on learning that Jerry was all right, and had made up their
quarrel.
When Sebright saw Jerry he rose up quickly and ran over,
addressing him with much effusion.
“Why, Jerry, old man, I don't know how to look you in the
face. To think that I didn’t know you, and that the first time
we met after so long I would be draggin’ at your hair, and you
clutchin’ my throat. How are you ? I was waitin’ here hopin’
to see you, and that’s how the row began. Me and Popham
was playin’ a game while we was waitin’, an’ somehow we fell
out, an'——-but I hope you don’t mind ?”
Jerry was in a large-hearted mood, and answered with some
thickness of speech— "All—righ—ole—fella”—that horrid
assurance of acquiescence which is the shibboleth of the
drunkard. He then forgave Popham also, who made a
shambling kind of excuse for his striking him.
At this stage Grinnell proposed “glasses round,” in which
proposition he was warmly supported by all those present, Jerry
offering to pay the expense.
It was late that night when Jerry got home. He was left a
the door of his lodgings by Mons and Sebright, and managed to
stagger upstairs.
Katey, who had been sitting alone all evening in growing
anxiety for his unexplained absence, heard the unusual sound
he made in ascending. She knew the step that was her husband’s,

and yet not his, and her heart stood still in deadly fear. She
was afraid to go to the door lest she should see something to
horrify her, and so sat still.
The door opened and Jerry staggered in, with hair tossed,
clothes all awry, and, worst pain of all to Katey’s loving heart,
with the bright eyes opaque, the erect form collapsing, and the
firm mouth relaxed with the drunkard's feeble maundering
gape.
Katey said no word but fell on her knees, lifting her hands
as ehe lifted her soul towards heaven for forgiveness for her poor
husband.
It was the first time Jerry had ever been drank, and it
struck his poor wife a blow as cruel as the stroke of death.
“Oh, Jerry, Jerry,” she moaned in her heart, " my love, my
husband, better we had stayed at home than this—oh, God,
than this.”
Chapter V.I.— A Summons.
The next morning was a bitter one. Katey had been crying all
night, whilst Jerry lay in his drunken sleep, tears which even
her prayers could not stop. To her this fall of Jerry's was but
the beginning of the end, and she had wept as one who looks
Into the future, and sees there the moving shadow of hopeless
misery, blighting and darkening everything. Towards
morning her tears had stopped, partly from exhaustion, and
partly because she had made a noble effort to overcome her
feelings, in order that Jerry might see hope, and not despair, in
her face, when he awoke.
Now, as the pale cold light was stealing in through the little
window, all seemed cheerless indeed.
There is something dreadfully severe in the test of early
morning light. Under it everything assumes its most real
aspect ; there is no use trying to hide or conceal anything from
it, for out the truth will surely come. Those who fear it have
no option but to shut it out altogether, and wait in darkness or
artificial light, till a sun that has shone on more iniquity and
untruth can look on them and their deeds, without crying
shame to all the world.
Poor Katey had cause for her grief. As she sat up in their
poor bed, nursing her baby, and shivering with cold and misery,
the light fell on Jerry's face—a changed face to her—for on it
was still the remains of a stupid frown, and the old firmness of
the mouth had not yet returned. For the first time she noticed
the cut on her husband’s head, and with a cry, suppressed lest
it should wake him, bent over to look at it. She was terribly
frightened, for she had not had even a suspicion that he had
been hurt. Now, having placed her baby beside her, she made
A careful examination, and was horrified at the appearance
which the wound presented. It was carefully dressed, but the
very carefulness of the dressing increased her fear, for she
could not see the actual extent of the wound, but could only
fear, and of course she feared the worst. So she watched and
waited till the morning light grew clearer and clearer, and
then at his usual hour Jerry awoke.
There are different ways of waking, and those who take the
trouble to study the matter can see for themselves how much
good or evil conscience has to do with it. Jerry awoke with an
evil conscience, that which makes “cowards of us all,” and as
the whole of yesterday, with its temptation, yielded to and its
last prolonged debauch, rushed back upon his mind, he covered
his eyes with his hands to shut out the reproach which he felt
should be in the eyes of his wife. Katey saw the motion and
understood it, and it wrung her heart with a bitter pain. She
put her arms round his neck and said, with the tenderness that
can only be in the voice of a loving wife exercising the sweet
woman's virtue of forgiveness :
“Oh, Jerry, Jerry, don’t turn from me. Look to me, Jerry,
dear. Can you find love and comfort anywhere but in the heart
of your wife.”
Jerry could not look her in the face, but blindly groping, as
if in the dark, he put his arms round her and hid his face in her
bosom.
Neither spoke for a while, but Katey rocked his head on her
breast as a while ago she had rocked her baby's. Presently
She said:
“ Don't speak, Jerry, not one word to me, Let me dress

your poor hurt head, and then you can go to your work amongst
your mates, knowing that there is no cloud between us.”
Jerry raised his head and looked at her, with his eyes fall of
honest tears and his mouth with something of the old firmness.
He hold her from him, at arm’s length, in a loving way, and
said, slowly :
" Katey, I have done wrong. Don't speak. I must say it,
for it is true ; but I hope it will be the last time. Trust me
this once, and you won't have more cause for fear.”
He did not wish her to answer, and so she stayed silent.
All that day Jerry worked very hard, and resisted all temptations, 
both those from within—for his excess of the night before
had parched him—and those from his friends ; and he went
home that night to Katey with a good conscience.
The next day was the same, and the next, and the next.
Thus his old confidence in himself came back to him : ‘Ye that
stand take heed lest ye fall” With his confidence came a temptation 
to do things to test {t, and conscious of his own strength
of purpose, Jerry wont across to Grinnell’s ‘“ just to prove,” be
thought to himself, ‘that I am not afraid.”
Great efforts wore made by those present, who included Mons,
Sebright, and Popham, to induce him to take something, but
he consistently refused, but with good humour. Still he felt it
pleasant to be in a cheerful room amongst a lot of companions,
much better than grubbing away at piles of wood grimy with
the dust of months, and be thought that now that he felt how
strong he was be would often take a ran across the road and
hear some of the gossip of the day between his spells of work.
These days were pleasant for Katey, for she saw that Jerry
was quite his old self, and she was beginning to get reconciled
to the new life. Jerry never told her of his visits to Grinnell's,
for he thought to himself, “What is the use of telling her.
There is no harm in it, but she will only be imagining harm,
and worrying herself about nothing.”
Sebright came to see him one evening. Katey made her
husband’s friend welcome, as every good wife does. The two
mea chatted pleasantly, Katey occasionally joining in. She
saw that Jerry enjoyed the evening, and she herself, devoid as
ho was of friends, enjoyed it too, and asked their guest to come
again, He was not a man to attend on ceremony in such
matters, and he did come again, and his visits grew more frequent 
till at last his coming was a matter to be expected every
second night or so.
Mons also paid a visit, and was made welcome, and repeated 
his visits also. Katey did not like either man, but
she disliked the latter. She had known Sebright Jong a0, and
he had at least the title of old acquaintanceship to be liked ;
but Mons was a newcomer, and one that she felt was, for her
husband’s sake, not to bo encouraged.
Thus things went on for some time, Occasionally letters
came from Dublin telling of the progress of affairs. At last
Katey received one, which she opened with some curiosity, as
the writing was not familiar to her. It ran as follows :—
“Dear Mrs. Katey—I have some news to tell you wh you
will be glad to hear. I am going to be married. You will
never guess who te, wh is Miss M'Anaspie, who I met at
your home, Margaret—that is, Miss M‘Anaspie, desires me
to say she hopes you're well, and that my young god-son,
or god-daughter, or whatever the brat is, is quite well. I
hope some day to be something else but a god-father. [Here
was inserted in a feminine hand—‘Don't mind him; he is a
wretch.’] We, wh we is I and Margaret—Miss M‘Anaspie—
are going over to London on our honeymoon, and hope to see
you. Margaret—Miss M'Anaspie—says you are sure to live in
some wretched hole, but you will not mind us going if we don’t ;
provided, Margaret—Miss M‘Anaspie—says that her new
clothes won't get spoiled by goin upstairs like a corkscrew to a
garret, or down a slippery ladder into a cellar, where your
head knocks above you in the grating, and your feet slip and
you fall amongst the oysters, and shrimps, and prawns, But
we will go all the same. Wishing you all the good, wishes wh
you wish — in which I join [written in a female band again]—
we remain, dew madam, yours respectfully,
"John Muldoon
“P.S. I hope Jerry hasn't taken to drinking yet.”

333
This letter made poor Katey very unhappy. There was in 
it a tone of selfish heartlessness which would have made its
contents a matter of indifference only for two or three of the
remarks it contained.
“What right have they,” Katey thought indignantly, “ to
think that Jerry would take to drinking? ‘Has he taken to it
yet,’ Indeed, as if Jerry would be a drunkard? My Jerry, that
never was drunk but once, and that never goes near a public-house 
now. And why did they think we lived in a garret, or a
cellar either. I'll be bound there isn’t as clean or as comfortable 
a room in John Muldoon’s house as this very room. It's
like their impudence.” And so ran on the little woman's
thoughts till something within her whispered, " Pride, Katey,
pride. Take care of pride. Keep your room clean and nice,
and it won’t matter whether they think you live in a garret or
anywhere else.”
In time Mr. and Mrs. Muldoon came over to London, and,
after sending a message to Katey that she might be prepared,
they paid her a visit. Mrs. Muldoon was radiant with every
colour in the rainbow, and from the number of garments
floating and flying about her looked of such a portentous
dimensions that her little stout husband seemed like a 
dwarf.
John Muldoon, however, did not consider himself a dwarf by
any means, and was as proud of his wife “as a dog with a tin tail." 
Mrs. Muldoon was most patronisingly affectionate as became her
exalted rank and her blushing condition. She kissed Katey
several times, and disported herself with the children, whom
she took turn about on her knees until she got tired of them.
Her conduct towards the baby was worthy of note. Towards
it she displayed an amount of affectionate curiosity worthy of
all praise. She dandled it in her hands, she kissed it, she
cuddled it, she almost strangled it, and by her unskilful nursing
managed to inflict on it much pain in the way of pins.

Katey stood by, now smiling, now anxious, as the child seemed
pleased or unhappy.
Suddenly, without any apparent cause, Mrs. Muldoon stood
up and said— 
" John, dear, I think we have stayed a long time. Mrs. 
Katey will want to get back to her work.” And so, taking her
husband's arm, went away, after a hurried farewell.
Katey was distressed, for she feared there was some offence,
and the tone adopted by her new relative was gall and wormwood 
to her womanly feelings. For they had not wished to see
Jerry, but merely asked for him. It was only, however, that
the bride was tired of the visit, and wished to see some more of
the sights of London.
A letter came from Parnell one day which gave Katey great
pleasure. One sentence in it ran as follows :—‘‘ Never forgot
that you must be your husband's Guardian Angel in case he falls
into any temptation. Above all things remember that your
hold on him is stronger while there is perfect confidence, When
there is between man and wife a shadow of suspicion or doubt
-when either hesitates to tell a secret or confess a fault, not
knowing how it may be received—then there is over their lives
the shadow of a dark future, Never keep a secret, then, except
when it is not your own, from your husband, and strive so to
act that he conceal nothing from you.”
As she read this the little woman said to herself with a mixture
of pride and thoughtfulness—
“There are no secrets between Jerry and me, thank God.
Sure there isn’t a thought of my heart I wouldn’t tell him, and
I know that he tells me everything.”
This thought tended to perfect the happiness which, now that
Jerry was going along so steadily and prosperously, was her
natural condition.
A few evenings after, whilst Jerry was at the theatre, Sebright

came in. In the course of conversation he happened to mention
Grinnell’s name.
" Who is Grinnell ?” asked Katey.
" Don’t you know Grinnell? Why he is a friend of Jerry's.”
“A friend of Jerry's ! how odd that he never mentioned him
to me. What is he?”
"He keeps the public-house opposite the stage door of the
Stanley.”
Kateys heart seemed to turn to stone, but she did not choose
to let Sebright see her feeling lest it should do harm, and so,
for the present, let the matter drop.
When her visitor had gone she was in a dreadful state of
mind. She longed to cry with a bitter longing, but feared to,
lest Jerry should find her eyes red on his return from work,
and so she bravely bore her sorrow—-the sorrow that followed
the thought of her husband’s concealment.
When Jerry returned he found her bright and cheerful as
usual, and in a talking humour. He had had a hard and long
day's work, and was now quite in a humour for a quiet chat.
Katey had been thinking over Sebright’s remark, and had come
to the conclusion that as Jerry had not told her about Grinnell
he had some object in his concealment, and that to force a confession 
would be to put him in the wrong at the very outset.
Accordingly she began her conversation, with the object of
trying to invite his confidence.
After talking over the state of things st the theatre, to which
she had been several times, Jerry's companions, and daily life,
She asked him— 
" What do you do all the evening, Jerry? It must be very
slow work for you.”
Well, it's slow at times ; but, as a rule, there's plenty to
do. So that with looking after the cellars, and the files, and
the wings, and trying to keep the men square and sober, my
time isn’t idle I can tell you.”
" Is it hard to keep the men sober ?”
“ Isn't it. They'd be always over in Grinnell’s if I let them.”
“ What is Grinnell’s ?”
" A public-house over the way.”
“ And is Grinnell the proprietor ?”
" He is, and a good fellow too—very pleasant and sociable.”
Jerry was thinking that the present was a good time to tell
his wife that he sometimes went in, bat did not drink anything ;
but such a look of fear came over her face, despite all her
efforts, that he did not care to go on, and hastily turned aside
the current of conversation.
Katey felt that the shadow was growing, but yet feared to
say anything more at present lest Jerry should be hurt.
Poor little woman ; she was in great doubt, pitiable doubt,
and as she had no one near to advise her, was driven almost into
despair. In her perplexity she wrote to Parnell a tender little
letter, full of love for her husband, and asking earnestly for
advice. The answer came in a way that she did not expect, for
one day, shortly after, whilst she was busily engaged over her
washing-tub a tall man, none other than Parnell himself,
walked in.
Katey looked at him in amazement, and gave a low, glad cry,
and, as she was, without even thinking of her wet hands and
arms, ran over and put her arms round his neck and kissed
him.
Whilst she was in this attitude Jerry came in, and, seeing his
wife with her arms round a man’s neck, for he did not at first
recognise Parnell—not expecting to see him—gave vent to an
indignant "Hullo !”
Parnell turned his head round, and Katey peeped over his
shoulder at her husband. When Jerry saw who it was he
nearly shook his hand off and pressed him into a chair,
asking him all sorts of questions, without giving him time to
reply.
Parnell told him all the Dublin news ; amongst other things
giving him a description of Muldoon’s wedding, at which they
all laughed heartily.
When dinner was over, Jerry had to hurry back to his work,
and Parnell remained to talk with Katey.
Katey did not delay, but proceeded to tell her trouble in
full, Parnell listening quietly, and looking very grave.
When she had finished, he took her hand in his and said—

" I do not like Jerry's keeping back anything from you, but
This matter will be all right, I hope and believe."
He was interrupted by the voice of the landlady calling out,
" Mrs. O'Sullivan, here's a boy who wants you to go down to the 
Theatre as quick as ever you can, something has happened."
Katey, with a deadly fear in her heart, hurried with Parnell
Down to the theatre.
(TO BE CONTINUED.)

THE PRIMROSE PATH.
BY A. STOKER, ESQ.
Chapter VII.—Katey's Trials.
WHEN Jerry had arrived at the theatre he had found
visitors waiting to see him. They were none other
than Mr. and Mrs. Muldoon, who had appeared just
before. The bride had taken a fancy to see the inside
of the theatre in which Jerry worked ; and being
certain of finding him at his business, the pair had come straight
to the theatre instead of calling at his lodgings.
A man is seldom so busy that he cannot spare a while to act
as cicerone to his friends ; and Jerry accordingly laid aside his
hurry, and conducted the happy couple over the theatre. Both
husband and wife took a great pleasure in everything, end
insisted in going everywhere. Margaret would work the
machines by which in the stage art the sounds of rain and
wind and thunder are produced ; and altogether the pair raised
as pretty a storm as had been heard in the theatre for many a
Long day.
In spite of her prejudice against going up corkscrew stairs:
and down into cellars, Mrs, Muldoon managed to poke her nose
into every odd corner of the stage. She on going up
Into the files, where the dust bay places almost inches thick,
quite heedless of the state of to which her clothing was
reduced. This part of the sight-seeing did not please her
husband much on account of several accidents which happened
to him. In the first place, he slipped on a fight of stairs as
steep as a ladder and “barked” bis shin. Then he ran his
Head against a beam and utterly destroyed his new silk hat.
Finally, be put his foot in a division between two boards and
hurt ankle, narrowly escaping a sprain. At all there
calamities his wife laughed loudly except at the spoiling of the

hat, for which she reprimanded him severely as being guilty of
a needless piece of extravagance. Mr. Muldoon began to think
that married life was not such a delightful thing after all.
Then they all went down to the cellars, as Mrs. Muldoon
wanted to see how the demons came up through the ground.
Jerry explained to her the mechanism of the traps, how a sliding
board was pulled away so as to leave an open space, into which
fitted exactly a piece of flooring, on which stood the person or
thing to be raised; that to this flooring were attached ropes
which worked over pulleys and were attached to immense
counter-weights, which, when suddenly released, shot up the
trap swiftly between its grooves, Mrs. Muldoon wished to see
it working, so Jerry drew away the slot, and released the
counter-weights. She gave a little ecstatic laugh as the trap flew
up, and then said to Jerry— 
" But surely it doesn’t work that way when there’s anything
on it ?”
“Just the same.”
“And how do you go up? Do you just stand on that and
then up you go ?
" Exactly.”
“ How do they stand? I suppose as stiff as pokers ?”
" This way,” said Jerry, getting up and standing on the
Trap.
This was just what Mrs. Muldoon wanted. She had all along
been watching for an opportunity of releasing the trap, and had
purposely led Jerry to stand on it that she might see him shoot
up through the opening in the stage. Without giving him
warning she suddenly released the trap, which flew up. Jerry,
to whom the experience was novel, for his business was to work
the trap and not ascend on it, felt the ground flying up with
him, and was horribly startled, for the idea of the trap working
of its own accord never entered his head. With an instinctive
movement he started back, and in doing so lost his balance.

He was hurled against the grove in which the trap worked, and
from tho velocity with which ho was moving received a desperate
low.
When the trap was closed, Jerry lay on it perfectly insensible,
and bleeding profusely.
In the meantime Mr. Muldoon had been prowling about the
cellar in a very bad humour, looking at the various appliances.
When the trap flew up Margaret saw that Jerry was hurt, but did
not know how much. She got afraid of something serious, and
wished to avoid the consequences. Accordingly she ran over
to her husband and said hurriedly-
John, dear, I think Jerry has hurt himself. He was standing
on the trap and it flew up, and he struck something. They will
lay the blame on us. Don’t you think we had better go ?”
" All right, but make haste,” said the husband. And so they
found their way with some difficulty into the street.
There was no one on the stage at the time, so Jerry’s accident
was unnoticed. He lay there for some time, still senseless, and
still bleeding, till Mr. Griffin saw him as he crossed the stage on
his way to his own room. He thought it was a case of drunkenness 
and turned the man over with his foot, with that contemptuous 
“get up” which is used on such occasions. As he did so
he saw the blood, and with an exclamation, bent over to look
more closely. He saw that some accident had occurred and
called for help. In a few moments the various employees
began turning up, one by one, till quite a little crowd had
assembled ; the alarm penetrated to Grinnell’s and a large contingent 
arrived from that quarter.
Jerry’s head was raised and the restoratives usual to such
occasions applied, but all in vain. Accordingly, a doctor was sent
for, and a boy despatched to tell Mrs, O'Sullivan.
Katey and Parnell arrived before the doctor. When the
former saw her husband, limp and senseless, with his pale face
looking vacantly upward from the knees of the man who was
supporting his head, and the stage floor round him stained with
blood, she gave a low, startled scream, which subsided into a
prolonged moan. For an instant or two she stood, as if petrified, holding her arms cut—surprise in her attitude and terror
in her looks. Then, with a little hoarse, sibillant moan, she
drew her left hand across her eyes and forehead, as if to clear
her brain and sight, and then she knelt beside her husband for
an instant, with her hands tightly clenched. The crowd made
way for her and stood a little aloof.
When she recovered her shock sufficiently to understand what
was before her, poor Katey’s grief was terrible. She threw herself 
on the body of her husband, and passed her hands over his
hands, his face, his hair, his bosom, whispering in a low, heart-
breaking voice :
" Jerry, Jerry, wake up; speak to me, Jerry, dear. Oh,
Jerry, won't you speak to me—to Katey, your wifo—your little
wife that loves you? Oh, weirastiru, weirasthru, he's dead,
he’s dead! He won't speak to me. He'll never speak to me;
again. Oh, Jerry, Jerry, asthore !—Jerry, Jerry.””
The poor little woman's voice died away into a long mean, as
she buried her face in tho bosom of her husband and wept.
Many of those standing round were touched, and turned away
their heads not to show their emotion. All were silent, and
waited,
The arrival of the doctor created a diversion. He was a fussy,
good-humoured little man, who always looked at the bright side
of things.  His natural impulse on seeing a woman give way to
violent grief was to think that it was without cause ; and, os
his impulse was supported by his experience, he generally continued so to think. When he bustled in and saw Katey stretched
on the body of her husband, he spoke—
“Come, come ! what is all this? Who is crying? The man’s
wife? Then the man’s wife has no right to cry. It is an insult
to me—to science. The man’s wife thinks, I suppose, that Providence is very hard on her. What right, I say, has the man’s
wife to judge Providence before science has spoken. The man
is sure not to be dead. Why, the man’s wife ought to be
ashamed of herself for not being thankful that he is not killed.
Stand away and let me see the man, and we'll very soon hear
The man's wife laughing instead of crying.”
While he was speaking he was preparing to make an examination of Jerry.

Katey was cheered by his tone, and stood up, anxious to the
last degree, but feeling somewhat ashamed of her hasty grief.
The doctor made the examination usual in such cases, snd
then stood up before he spoke. Katey watched his lips to tell
by their motion the coming words before they could be
spoken.
“ Just as I thought.” Katey’s heart gave a great bound of
joy, and her head began to reel, so that she seemed to hear the
remainder of his speech as through a curtain. " Now look at
the man’s wife—she is going to faint, I warrant, just when she
ought to be calm. That's right. Courage, my poor girl, your
husband is only stunned, and will be able to put his arms round
your neck in ten minutes.”
Katey’s faintness began to pass away, and she knelt down by
Jerry ready to do the doctor's bidding. The letter gave some
directions, which were carried out, and after a while Jerry
opened his eyes. For a time he did not remember anything,
and seemed quite dazed, staring blankly at the crowd of faces
which he saw around him. Presently he recovered sufficiently
to answer the doctor's questions, which elicited the fact that he
was hurt in the head and the side. His wounds were dressed,
and Katey, after receiving instructions as to his treatment, took
him home, with Parnell’s assistance, in a cab.
Parnell was obliged to return to Dublin that night ; and as
Jerry was very feverish and restless, Katey was obliged to sit
up with him all night. In the morning Jerry was worse, and
seemed to be a little off his head. He did not seem to realise
where he was, and answered Katey's anxious inquires so
strangely that she got frightened and sent for Dr. Sharp, in
whom she had acquired great confidence from his manner at the
time of the accident.
When he saw Jerry Dr. Sharp looked very grave. Katey saw
his face fall and began to cry. He turned on her severely and
said, although with a spice of tenderness through his sternness—
“Silence, woman. This is no time to cry. This is a time to
act—time enough to cry when there is a reason for it.”
" Oh, doctor is he very bad ?” asked poor Katey, so anxiously
that the doctor patted her on the head as he answered :—
“It is best for you to face the worst, my dear, The wound
on his head is worse than I thought, think he will have an
attack of brain fever. There now, I oughtn't to tell you anything. Come, come, stir yourself, and then you won't want to
faint. We must get him to a hospital whilst he is fit to be
moved.
At the word hospital Katey’s fear became deadly, for she
looked upon an institution as in some wise synonymous with
ruin ; but the doctor was peremptory, and before she had time
to mourn Jerry was safely lodged in the nearest hospital.
Katey would have stayed with him all day only that she had
her children to look after. Her sorrow at leaving him was much
mitigated by the fact that one of the nurses, a Sister of Mercy,
with whose sweet gentle face she fell in love; had promised to
give him unfailing attention.
When she got home and thought of its desolation, now temporary, but perhaps to be permanent-—Katey would have
willingly cried herself stupid, “But she felt that she must not
give way to her feelings ; the children were sobbing bitterly,
having missed her for so long ; and she felt moreover, that now
during Jerry's illness, which might be a protracted one, there
devolved on her the entire support of the family.
When she was going to bed that night she knelt down to say
her prayers with a sadder heart than she had ever had before;
she prayed for help and strength, and made a silent vow that
she would work unceasingly and uncomplainingly, so that all
might be as of old for Jerry when he should be well.
Nobly she kept her vow. Early and late she toiled, her only
times of relaxation being those which the spent in the hospital
watching by her husband's bedside with her heart wrung by
his piteous moans. He did not know her, and thus wrung her
heart still more. To a loving wife there is scarcely anything so
painful as the knowing that the man she loves—who is a part of
herself—does not know her-—that the twain, which were one, are
Now but twain again. 
She found it easy enough to get work at first, for some of the 
People living near knowing of her misfortune held out a

helping hand. There was not much  gain, for the neighbourhood 
was a wretched one, but what little was came freely.
It is amongst the very poor that true generosity is found.
The rich man pours his gifts, large to magnificence it may be,
into the treasury, but he gives them from his superfluity : it is
not often that he has to deny himself in order to be even lavish.
But the mite of the widow comes out of her distress, and is
Valued accordingly. It would give many a wholesome lesson to
even the truly charitable rich to see and know the good deeds
which are done by their poorer brethren. It is only amongst the
poor that charity will tolerate equality—nay, where is accorded
the dignity which is the birthright of misfortune.
Katey got some little help from Dublin from Mrs. O'Sullivan,
who, however, was unable to do much for her on account of
the absconding of a solicitor to whom she had intrusted all her
little savings.
After a little while the week began to fall away ; and do
what she would poor Katey found it hard to keep the wolf
from the door. She was up before daylight and into the
market to buy vegetables which she then sold from house to
house ; she went charring ; she tried needlework. Everything
by which an honest penny could be turned she tried, and found
no degradation in any employment no matter how lowly.
At last the constant working and watching tended, together
with her anxiety, to make her so weak that she could hardly
work. Jerry was still dangerously ill. He had by this time
regained his consciousness, and she had the pleasure each day
Of hearing his voice speaking sweet words to her. But he was
still wretchedly helpless, and she knew that it would be many
B long day before he had regained his old vigour, She did not
let him know of her work, but managed to let him believe that
the help which she was getting from his mother was sufficient to
keep her and the children from want.
When her strength began to go, many articles which could be
dispensed with to go too. Katey's first visit to a pawn-office
was a bitter experience. She was afraid and ashamed to go
alone, and got her landlady, from whom she borrowed a thick
veil, to go with her. She bore the ordeal well enough, but
when she came home she burst out crying, and took her
children on her lap and wept over them, and clasped them convulsively to her arms.
Her first visit was not her last; and by the time that Jerry
was discharged from hospital their lodging, now reduced to a
single room, was denuded of all the of luxury which
Had once been Katey'a pride, and even of those articles of
utility which were not necessary.
It was with a sinking heart that Katey took home her husband, 
and it was a moment of agony to her when Jerry looked
around him in bewilderment, searching with wondering eyes
for all the objects which were familiar to him. Jerry was
thunderstruck. For a time be stood silent, and then asked as
does one in a dream—
“ Why, Katey, what's all this? Where is everything gone
to? I don't seem to understand.”
Katey was silent, thinking what to say, Jerry asked again
with that irritability which often accompanies extreme physical
prostration-
"Why don't you answer me? It isn't kind to keep me waiting."
Katey burst into tears. Her feelings and her strength had
been too long tried, and now on this day, which she had hoped
and prayed for, when her husband had been restored to her,
that he should accuse her of unkindness was too much. Jerry
got still more impatient, and spoke crossly.
“ Katey, what do you mean by crying when I ask you a
question? Have I done any wrong to you? Perhaps it would
be better if I had died.”
Katey cried still more bitterly, and could only murmur as she
laid her head on her husband's shoulder-
" Oh, Jerry, Jerry. Oh, Jerry, Jerry.”
He put her aside with a motion rather of impatience than of
unkindness. Katey did not distinguish the difference; with
her head bent down she did not see his face, but merely felt
the motion, snd her sorrow turned into a wall.
" Oh, Jerry, Jerry, Jerry, Jerry, that ever the day should
come when you should put me from you, and after all l've suffered

Oh-h-h, Oh-h-h. Oh-h-h," and she moaned as one
in dire pain.
Jerry threw himself back in his chair, and said, with a kind
Of desperation-
" Oh, go on, go on. Cry away, and make me and yourself
miserable. Would to God I had died, and then you might have
Been more cheerful."
Katey heard no more, she fainted.
Chapter VIII. - Down the Hill
From that hour a cloud seemed to have settled between Jerry
O'Sullivan and his wife. Katey did all in her power to stone
for what seemed in Jerry's eyes to be a piece of petulance, but
which she knew to be the result of nervous weakness springing
from protracted suffering and overwork. Jerry, as he got a little
stronger too, got less petulant, and did not resist Katey's 
advances, although there seemed to be still in his breast a sense
of injury which took the outward expression of a kind of latent
antagonism, specially galling to his wife. It was a good while
before he was able to work; and neither his strength nor temper
was improved by finding that during his illness his place at the 
theatre had been given away to another man. When he was
able he called to the theatre, and after waiting for a long time,
saw the manager, who coolly told him that of course he could
not afford to pay two men for doing the same work, and so had 
been obliged to get another tradesman.
Jerry remonstrated, saying that he did not wish to take away
any man's bread, but that after all, fair play was fair play, and 
that as he had been injured in the theatre he thought he should
be treated with some consideration, and be restored to his place
which he had done nothing to forfeit. He was met with the
Answer, that a man must bear the risk and trouble of his own
accidents on his own shoulders; that Jerry had had the working of the
machinery entirely under his own control, and that it was his
own fault if anything went wrong.
Jerry felt that there was a soupgon of justice in this, and
said no more. Indeed he did not get the chance of speaking,
as the manager walked away. He did not know how the accident 
had occurred, for the idea of Mrs. Muldoon’s part in it
never entered his head. He took it for granted that it was one
of those accidents “which will occur,” and hard as was his lot,
that he must put up with it.
He tried to get work in the neighbourhood, but there was
then in London a strike in the building trade, and there was no
work to be had. Day after day, Jerry walked for miles and
miles, trying every place to get work, but all in vain. He had
not yet recovered his strength, and so felt his efforts cramped,
and consequently worried himself so much, and fretted so constantly, that both his health and his temper suffered.
Katey had much to bear. Since Jerry was earning nothing, she
had to earn for all. She worked early and late, and grudged herself
even sufficiency of food that Jerry might have enough and so
get stronger. She was always in good humour, and no matter
what pain or sorrow was in her heart there was over a loving
smile to meet Jerry when either he or she returned home.
Still she could not earn enough to buy sufficient food, and so the
pawn-office was visited again and again, till the home was left
well nigh empty.
At last Jerry, finding that no work at his trade could be obtained, made up his mind to do what he could. He tried to get
work in different places and of different kinds, but, like many
another poor fellow, he found that London is too full of hungry
mouths for work to go long a-begging, and it seemed to him that
his lot in life was to be for the future just too late to get anything be fought for. One day he thought he would try the
theatre, for he knew work, though of poor kind, was sometimes
to be got there. It was not without a mighty effort that he
made up his mind to seek employment from the man who had
superseded him, and whom in his heart he regarded bitterly as
an usurper. The new man seemed to recognise and to reciprocate the hostility, and his manner to poor Jerry was extremely
galling. He was happy to be able to show his own power by
giving work to the other man, and by patronizing him, or else
he would have peremptorily refused. As it was he gave him
some work, and even made a point of seeming to treat him

differently from the other men who were doing the same work—
a fact which made every one of them hate Jerry with the hatred
of jealousy.
The little he now earned helped to banish the extreme want
from the household, yet somehow all seemed now even more
miserable than when dire cold and hunger stared them in the
face. The cause was this. While cold and hunger, and dire
misery were inmates of the house there was something to be
borne—there was a sense of complete difference between the old
circumstances and the present, altogether a sense that this
through which they were passing was unreal—merely a crisis—
and that the present evils must pass away in time. But now no
such sense of contrast existed. Jerry was working as of old,
and enough money was coming in to buy off the officers of the
grim sheriff, Death. Jerry was working, indeed, but not in the
old way. There was now neither hope nor ambition. To work
was merely to toil ceaselessly to support existence that was a
burden.
Jerry grew more and more despondent as the days wore on.
Katey’s bright looks and hopeful words were now of no avail,
and slowly and surely the conviction grew on her that sorrow,
hopeless and overwhelming, was coming into their lives. Jerry
began to feel, in all its force, how great had been his folly in
leaving Dublin. Whilst he worked he kept thinking to himself, how different all would have been had he remained at
home. Here sickness and trouble would have been his surest
titles to the help and sympathy of his many friends; but in
London, amid strangers where the maxim of life seemed to be
sauve qui peut—a maxim which might be translated “ Every
man for himself”’—all was different, and to be down in the
world was to be trampled upon.
Whenever he thought thus, there came to Jerry a fierce temptation to lose sight of his misery as other men lost sight of
theirs—in that hell-cauldron, which is picturesquely termed
“the bowl.” He resisted this temptation for a time, but he
felt that his resolution was giving way. He would have returned
to Dublin but for lack of means, and he had not yet fallen so
low as to beg for assistance.
One day he was reprimanded in good round terms by his
superior for some seeming fault. He answered temperately,
and was told to “shut up.” He did shut up, for he felt that
he dared not risk his present employment.
That day at dinner hour he went to Grinnell’s and drank
recklessly. When a man who resists temptation for a time
suddenly gives way to it, his fall is mighty. Jerry was unable
to return to his work, and after a drunken sleep in the taproom was left at home in the evening still half stupefied.
Katey saw what had happened ; and none can imagine her
anguish save those who have known and felt some terrible
sorrow—some sorrow where there was no thought of self. She
did not wish for death, because she thought of her children ;
but too surely she saw that Jerry had been drinking to drown
his care, and she knew that till the care disappeared—which
could now only be at death—-the remedy would be attempted
again and again.
And she was right. Shakspere was right, too, when he
wrote—
“ Lilies that fester smell far worse than weeds.”
When a naturally good disposition is warped or bent in a
wrong direction all the strength that had been for good works now
for evil ; and in proportion to the natural strength of character
is the speediness of the complete ruin. Day after day Jerry
visited Grinnell's, and day by day he grew more of a sot. He
very seldom got drunk, because he felt that such would involve his dismissal; but he was nearly always in a state of
“fuddle.”
Katey’s lite grow harder and harder to bear, but she strove
ever with herself, and determined that no effort, active or
passive, either of action or endurance, should be wanting on
her part to reclaim her husband. She used to wait up for Jerry
no matter what hour he stayed out till, and never made his
coming home unpleasant by showing that she had been sitting
up or suffering anxiety from his absence.
A couple of times when she thought it likely that she would
see him she peeped through the door of Grinnell’s, and each
time saw Jerry either drinking or playing cards, on following

both pursuits at once. The gambling was a new phase of vice
to her, for she did not know that the one sin follows hard on
the track of the other.
Jerry had, indeed, gone down the hill. With no friends
round him to arrest his downward course, but surrounded by
a troop of evil companions who wished to see him as low or
lower than themselves, he was falling, failing still. At such
times Katey had stood shivering in the doorway, shrinking out
into the night each time anyone entered the house or left it,
but coming back again and again as if fascinated. She noticed 
that Jerry in his play seemed to have always bad luck, and to
always play recklessly. It was heartbreaking work to her
standing thus an unseen witness of the fall of the man she
loved better than herself, and oftentimes the temptation to go
in and try to induce him to leave the place became almost too
strong for her. She retained herself, however, overcome for the
time by the deadly fear that any overt act of hers might shear
away the last thread of her influence over him.
At last one evening the temptation to enter became too
strong. Jerry had seemingly worse luck than usual, and drank
more accordingly. He got exceedingly quarrelsome, and before
anyone could interfere a fight had arisen. It was not a long
fight, for the bystanders were numerous, and soon choked off
the combatants the way men choke off fighting dogs.
Jerry's opponent—none other than Sebright—regained command of his temper in a few seconds ; but as for Jerry himself
his rage was frightful. He would not be pacified or appeased
in any way, but continued to rage and storm with purple
swollen face and voice hoarse from passion and drink. Katey
saw that they were making him worse by holding him the way
they did, and irritating him. She could stand it no longer.
She pushed open the door and entered.
At the sound of the opening door all turned round in fear that
the newcomer was a policeman, and in the universal movement
Jerry was released. Seeing a pretty young women enter-—for
Katey, despite her long spell of hardship and suffering, was a
pretty young woman still—the men who did not know her begun
whet they called ‘‘being civil.” Jerry knew instinctively that
Katey would not have entered the public-house without some
cause, and his conscience told him that that cause was his own
misconduct ; and so in his semi-drunken rage he determined to
vent his anger, which was half for himself, on her. In addition,
he beard the sotto voce remarks of the other men, and this inflamed him still more. He came angrily forward, and said to
his wife in hard, stern angry tones—
" What brings you here ?"
The suddenness of the question, and the tone of it, took
Katey by surprise, and she had to pause before replying. Her
embarrassment was increased by the glare of light, and the rude
admiring eyes turned upon her.
Jerry repeated his question with his face inflamed and his
right hand raised. It was the first time Jerry's hand had ever
been raised to her in anger, and it was no wonder that poor
Katey covered her face and wept. This seemed to make Jerry
more angry still. He took her by the arm roughly, and shook 
her , saying-
"At it again. Cryin'-always crying'." Then, again, with a 
sudden change, “ What brings you here, I say——what brings
you here ?”
Katey lifted her head, and looked at him pleadingly through
her tears. "Come home, Jerry ; come home.”
“I'll not go home. Go you home and don't dare to watch or
follow me again. Out of this, I say—out of this.”
‘Oh, Jerry, Jerry, don’t send me away to-night. Oh, Jerry,
you're hurting me; indeed you are. I'll go quietly. Do let me
go, Jerry. Look at all the men. It is ashamed of my life I am."
" Out of this, I say.”
" Oh, Jerry, come home.”
For answer Jerry lifted his hand and struck her in the face.
The blow was a severe one, but Katey did not seem to feel it.
The pain in her heart at the spirit which prompted the blow was
So great that no outward pain would have touched her for the
moment. With the courage and resolution of utter despair—
for what could ow be worse since Jerry had struck her—she
clung to him, crying almost wildly-
" Come home, come home.”

Jerry dashed her aside, and ran over to the counter.
" Give me brandy,” he said to Grinnell, "quick, man, give
me brandy.”
Grinnell was in nowise backward, and gave him as he desired.
He drank off two or three glasses one after the other despite all
Katey could do to prevent him.
After this his coming home was a matter of mere labour, for
he got too drunk to stand or to think, and lay on the floor like
a log.
Katey looked round appealingly for help. Sebright and
Mons, the only two men whom she knew, had both disappeared,
for both of them retained sufficient pride to make them anxious
to avoid the gaze of the injured woman. The help came from
an unexpected quarter, Grinnell, who had hitherto bean leaning complacently across the bar, came from behind it, and said
very gently—
“ Let me help you.”
Katey was so anxious about Jerry that she did not notice
the strangeness of the offer coming from such a man, but answered gratefully—
“ Oh, thank you, sir. God will bless you."
Grinnell smiled softly to himself, but Katey did not see the
smile.
The pot-boy was sent for a cab, and, when it came, was put
in charge of the bar, whilst Grinnell helped Katey to take home
her husband. Thera was lots of assistance to put him into the
cab, but, as she could not get him out hersalf, Grinnell went
with her himself. When the vehicle began to move, Grinnell
asid softly —
“ This is a very sad affair.”
" Oh, sad indeed,” sighed Katey.
“ I wish to God,” said Grinnell, with intensity of voice, “that
I had known of you before. Your husband would not have got
drink in my house.”
“ God bless you, sir, for these words. Oh, you will help me
to keep him straight now, will you not ?”
“ I will.”
" You see,” said Katey, feeling that a palliation of her
husband's conduct was necessary, “the poor fellow has had
much trouble and sorrow, and he was badly treated at the
theatre.”
" I know it—I know it,” said Grinnell, with indignation.
“ Didn't the whole neighbourhood ring with it, and the people
cry shame on old Meredith. Why, I couldn’t stand it, and it
was no business of mine. I only wished to see justice. I amn't
so bad as I look. I went to him, and says I—‘ Look you here,
sir,’ says I, ‘you're doin’ wrong. Here's the best workman in
London, and the best fellow, too,’ says I, ‘and you're losin’ him
and doin’ a wrong thing, And don’t you expect to gain by it,
says I, ‘for wickedness never prospers,’ says I, ‘and I toll you
what,’ says I, ‘some of the other theatres will got hold of him,
and then won't you be sorry. I have a good deal of influence,'
says I, ‘and I'll use it all for him'” ——
He was going on thus when the cab stopped. He helped
Katey to lift out Jerry, and between them they carried him up
to the room.
Grinnell waited a few minutes only, and said good night to
Katey in a most friendly manner.
" I will call round in the morning and see how he goes on,"
he said, ‘and if you want anything that I have, you know it
Is quite at your disposal.”
" Oh, sir, I wouldn’t for the world. I have no money, and I
wouldn't for the world have Jerry feel that I owed money for
anything.”
Grinnell gave a sudden unintentional laugh. " Don't you
fret about that,” he said, “O'Sullivan owes me myself too
much money to let that trouble him."
Katey put her hand on her heart at this fresh blow, bat said
nothing.
Grinnell went on:
" But that doesn't matter. Lord bless you. He's as welcome
as the flowers of May. I'm too fond of him to let a trifle of
money vex him.” Then he went out.
Katey, despite her prejudice, could not but feel better disposed towards him. The narrative of what he had done for Jerry

in going to the manager, touched her deeply, and she said to
herself :—
“ Well, we should never judge by appearances. It is a lesson
to us.”
Had she known that in all Grinnell had said there was not one
single word of truth, she might have thought differently,
(TO BE CONTINUED.)


THE PRIMROSE PATH.
BY A. STOKER, ESQ.
Chapter IX.—The Trail of the Serpent.
KATEY watched by her husband for a long time till
at last she cried herself to sleep. Her sleep was
troubled by horrid dreams of care and sorrow, and
nameless and formless horrors. She did not wake
however. When we dream thus of awful things,
and do not wake, the effect is much more wearing on the
nervous system than if we did; and so in the morning when
Katey woke she felt chilled and miserable. She started up,
and in the half-light of the early morning found that she was
alone. Jerry had waked early, and had hurriedly got up, struck
with remorse when he remembered the previous evening, and
not daring to meet the face of his wife. Katey was at once in
deadly fear, for her woman's weakness prompted thoughts of
terrible possibilities. She got up quickly and went down into
the street.
She looked right and left for any sign of him, and after wavering between them finally with an instinct, pitiful since it had
such a genesis, took her way towards Grinnell’s, feeling that she
would find her husband there.
Her instinct was not deceived. When she peeped in through
the door of the public-house she saw Jerry standing by the bar
with a glass in his hand, which Grinnell was filling. A man
does not hold his glass in such a way unless it is being refilled,
and this poor Katey knew by instinct. She shuddered as she
looked —for she saw that Jerry was drinking to get drunk
quickly.
Indeed it was a sorry and a pitiful picture—one which man
or woman with a human heart in their bosom would shudder to
see. In the grey light of the wintry morning the working man
with clothing tossed, and hair unkempt—with feverous look
and bloodshot eyes, drinking his rum at a draught, and taking
it from the hand of one who, with soiled finery and unwashed
face, might have stood for the picture of “Debauch.”
Grinnell's sharp eyes saw Katey as she peeped, but he did not
seem to notice. Presently he spoke loudly, so loudly that Katey
could hear.
" Now, O'Sullivan, that will freshen you, I hope, and make
you think clearly, but I won't give you any more, so don’t ask
me.”
“ What do you mean ?” asked Jerry, in amazement, for up to
that moment Grinnell had been pressing him to drink.
“ Never mind what I mean; only I won't give you any
more.”
“ Are you jokin’ ?”
" I am not.”
Jerry looked at him angrily a moment, and then flattening
his hat down on his bead, said ;
" Oh, very well—oh, very well. Then I'll go somewhere
else." 
Katey was afraid he would see her, so left the doorway and
hurried down the street.
Jerry came home about breakfast-time in a frightfully bad
humour. He had had just enough of liquor to make him wish
for more, and having tried to get credit several places and been
refused, felt a savage disappointment. The sight of Katey’s
disfigured face in no wise tended to mollify him, and he spoke
to her with a harshness that was almost savage :
“ Why don’t you put somethin’ on your face ?”
Katey did not know what to say, so remained silent.
“ Put somethin’ on it, I tell you. Am I to be always made
wretched by you ?”
Katey could only murmur :
" Always, Jerry? Always?” and began to cry.
“ Stop your cryin’, I tell you. Here—I'll not stay here any
longer. No wonder I have to keep away when I find nothin’
here but tears.”
" Jerry, dear, I won't cry,” said Katey, in affright, lest he
should go out. " I won't cry, dear, and I'll cover up my face
-only don’t go out yet. Look, I am not cryin’ now. See, I'm
laughin'."

" Stop your laughin’, I say. There isn't much to laugh at 
Here."
This was too much for Katey, and again the broke down.
Jerry got up to go out ; she went to the door, and standing before 
it, said :
" For God's sake, Jerry, don’t go out yet.”
" Let me go, I say. Will you dare to stop me.”
" Oh, Jerry, for the sake of the children, don’t go out. For
the sake of the love you used to have"——
" Out of the way, I say.”
" Oh, Jerry."
" Let me go, I tell you. I won't. Then take that,” and
again he struck her. She cowered away with a low wall. As
he left the room, Jerry said, with an effort at self-justification :
" I see the way to manage you, now. Take care that you don’t
rouse the devil in me.” 
Katey was sobbing still when Grinnell came to ask " how
Jerry was this morning.” She felt glad to see him on account
of his refusing to give Jerry drink, and shcok him warmly by 
the hand.
Grinnell looked at her without speaking, but manifestly
taking notice of her bruised face ; then he turned away and
seemed as if drying an unostentatious tear. Katey felt drawn
towards him by the manifestation of sympathy ; and so it was
with an open heart that she commenced to thank him for his
promise to assist in reclaiming Jerry.
Don’t distress yourself,” he said after some talk, "you see 
the influence I have over him, not only personally, but from my
position, is ever great. He owes me money"—Katey winced,
he noticed it, and kept harping on that string—"he owes me, I may 
say, a good deal of money, not that I want him to pay me yet,
or that I ever mean to press him for it, but owing me a good
deal of money, you know, I can put the screw on any time
I like. “For instance, ff he did anything to offend me, or if anyone

belonging to him got in my way, and I wished it, I could
put my thumb on him and crush him like a fly.”
Katey laid her hand on his arm and asked him pleadingly—
" Oh, don’t talk like that, it seems so dreadful to me that it
frightens me.”
“ There, there, my dear,” he answered patting her shoulder,
“don't fret, I do not mean to crush him like a fly. I only
mention it to show you what I could do if I had occasion to.
You see when a man is down the hill the best thing for him is
to have some determined friend who can crack the whip over
his bead.”
Katey began to get frightened, she did not know why. She
was without knowing from what cause getting a repulsion and
fear for the man before her. It might be, she thought, when
she asked herself the question, from his hideous aspect, which
was enough to alarm anyone. The thought of Jerry being in
the power of anyone was a bitter one to her, but that of Jerry
being in the power of this man was too dreadful to be realised.
Grinnell, who was watching her closely, saw that some ides
of the kind was in her mind, and tried with all his might to
banish it. He made kind promises, he offered to do generous
acts, he spoke kindly and tenderly to Katey, using every means
to rule her reason. But still that instinct which is above all
reason spoke in her, and whispered her even not to trust to
him, Grinnell sew that he was not masking way in her good
graces, and took his leave shortly, showing by his manner that
be was hurt, though not offended.
Katey was so glad to get rid of him that she was not as kind
in her manner as usual. When the door closed behind him she
sank with sigh of relief on one of the two chairs which still
remained to them. The children, who had hidden in affright
behind the bed as Grinnell had entered, scared by his frightful
face, now came forward and hid their little heads in her lap, and
began to cuddle her in their pretty way.

After Grinnell had departed, Katey began to take herself to
task for not feeling more kindly towards him. The natural
justice of her disposition told her that so far she knew he had
acted kindly, and intended to act more kindly still. But then
in her heart arose the counterpleading—" so far as she knew”
—and she still continued to mistrust.
Jerry remained out all that day ; Katey was almost afraid to
go look for him—partly lest she should arouse his anger towards
her for following him, and so widen the breach between them,
and partly because with womanly delicacy she feared that the
sight of her swollen face might tend to lower him amongst his
companions.
It was not till the time for closing the public houses came
that she ventured in desperation to go in search of him; she
tried Grinnell’s expecting to find him there. Thre was no one
in the place except the proprietor ; and Katey, after come hesitation, 
pushed open the door and entered. Grinnell, with an
exclamation, came from behind the bar, and shook her head.
" I was just going to call up to see you,” he said.
“What for?"
" To tell you about Jerry.”
" About Jerry ? What about him, sir?" asked Katey, in
alarm.
“ Do not fret yourself, my dear. Tt will be all right.”
“ What will? For God's sake tell me if anything is wrong? 
Remember he is my husband ?”
" Very well then. He got into trouble to-day. He took
too much to drink, and began fighting, and the police get hold
of him."
This was too much for Katey. She fainted.
When she recovered, Grinnell informed her "that Jerry was
in the lock-up, where he would be detained all night, and that
he would be brought before the magistrate in the morning.”
Katey never closed an eye that night. The greates part of
the time she passed on her knees in prayer, in the rest she
watched her children as they slept. In the morning early she
was off to the pawnbrokers with some of the last of their goods
to raise money to pay Jerry’s fine in case one should be imposed.
She was at the police-court long before the time of commencing
business, and having got into the court waited as patiently as
she could till Jerry should be tried.
When business did commence she had still to wait for a good
while, for there were a large number of cases to be tried, and
as the time when he must appear grew closer and closer her
heart beat faster and faster till she had to press her hand on her
side from pain. At last Jerry's case came on. It was a cruel
blow to Katey to see her husband standing in the dock with his
head hanging down, and a policeman standing beside him.
The charge, although exactly similar to many that had preceded 
it, seemed a terrible one to poor Katey, so terrible that
she could not see anything but the dire punishment of imprisonment 
before Jerry, for her wifely fears multiplied everything
many fold.
Some witnesses were called, and deposed to such things as
fully supported the charge of assault. One of the attorneys
who defend criminals in the police-courts spoke in favour of
Jerry, and in the course of his remarks mentioned that it was
a first offence, and that his client had up to the night before
never struck a blow in his life. At this statement the complainant, 
who was standing by, laughed a loud ironical laugh,
suddenly checked as he caught the magistrate's eye fixed on him.
The magistrate was a clever man and a very experienced one,
and although he said nothing he kept his wits about him.
Presently his eye wandered over the court, and he soon fixed
on Katey’s anxious face. As he noticed the signs of ill-usage a
look grew imperceptibly over his face, and the officers of the
court who knew his looks felt that it boded ill for Jerry. He
allowed the case to spin out a few minutes till he saw Jerry
recognise his wife—he knew that she was his wife, and that to him
was due her ill-treatment from the flush in his face. Then, when
the case was concluded, instead of imposing a fine, as Jerry had
anticipated, he ordered him a week's imprisonment with hard
labour. It was one of his resolves to put down wife-beating
if he could.
Jerry covered his face with his hands : and Katey was just
about to rush forward with a wild prayer of marcy on her lips

when a policeman standing by pulled her back, saying in a
kindly voice.
“No use, my girl. It would only get you into trouble, and
could do no good. Best go home and take care of the children
till be comes out,”
Katey felt the wisdom of the remark, and stayed still.
Before Jerry left the dock he dropped his hands from his
face and looked round the court with a hard cold look of recklessness 
that made Katey shudder. He did not seem to notice
her at first, but seemed to include her in the category of his
enemies. As he passed her on his way out, however, he gave
her a look which said to her as plainly as if he had used the
words—
“ This is your work. You couldn't keep your cut face away
for once. Very well, you'll see that I'll be even with you yet.”
Katey went home without crying. Despair is dry-eyed when
it is most blank. It had seemed to her at each successive
disaster that now at last had come the culmination of all that
was most dreadful to be borne ; but it was not till now that she
knew the bitterness of despair. It was not even that Jerry no
longer loved her, but that he hated her, and to her attributed a
shame that she would have given her life to avert.
Grinnell called to her to try his powers of consolation. He
told her most soothingly that a week was not long, and that the
shock of the sentence would tend to sober Jerry ; and, with
many arguments of a like kind, tried to raise her spirits. He
stayed a long time, and left her in a tranquil frame of mind.
He come again for a few minutes in the evening, and made
some kindly offers of help, which, however, she did not accept.
Next day he came again; and every day that week—sometimes 
twice in the day. Katey did not like his coming so often,
but he seemed to disinterested and kindly disposed that she did
not like to hurt his feelings by telling him so.
At last her eyes were opened to the fact that instinct may be
stronger than reason.
She was working in the theatre, where she had got a job of
cleaning to do, when she overheard some of the men talking.
Katey was too honourable to voluntarily listen, and would never
have done so in cold blood, but she heard her husband's name
mentioned, and the curiosity arising from her great love, which
made her anxious to find how he stood in the opinions of his
companions, made her pause and listen with bated breath.
She found what pained her much, and yet had in it a gleam
of hope. The men seemed to think that Jerry was drifting into
being a hopeless drunkard, and that if he continued to go on, as
he had been going on, he would get an attack of delirium tremens.
One of them remarked presently :
“ That was a damnable trick of Grin’s.”
“ What was that ?" asked another.
" Don't you know ? or you? or you? Why, men, you're as
blind as bats. I saw it all long ago.” 
“ Saw what? Out with it, man.”
“ Well, you see, Grinnell is sweet on the pretty little Irish-woman,
And wanted to get the husband out of the way-What's that?"
It was the stir Katey made as she rose from her knees, where
she bad been scrubbing and leaned against the wall, with her
heart beating wildly and her face on fire.
" Well, but what was the trick ?”
" Why, man, can’t you see? He put Dirty Dick up to make
him pick a quarrel when he was full of drink, and then quietly
sent the pot-boy to send round a policeman.”
" Oh, the blackguard. Tell you what, boys, we oughtn't to
stand that,” the voice was that of a man who had not yet
spoken.
" Don’t make a blamed ass of yourself. What call is it of
ours? Don't you see that it would do no good, The woman is
glad enough of it for all she takes on.”
" How do you know that ?”
“ How do I know it? Why, because I have eyes, and ears,
and amn’t a fool. Sure he spends half the day with her, till all
the neighbours are beginnin’ to talk.”
Katey felt as though she were going mad. The scales seemed
to have fallen from her eyes, and, with the clear light of her
present knowledge, she understood the villainy of Grinnell.
She was afraid to hear more, and moved away and worried

with such desperation, that presently her strength began to
leave her.
When her work was over she tottered home, being scarcely
able to walk steadily, and having arrived, shut the door
behind her and locked it; and then she lay down on her bed
in a state of mental and physical prostration, which was akin to
death.
When Grinnell called he found the door locked, and, having
knocked several times without getting any answer, went away
without saying a word.
Chapter X.—The End of the Journey.
Katey waited in, in the morning, at the time at which
Grinnell had been in the habit of calling for the last few days ;
her object was to avoid him, and she feared meeting him if
she should go out, Luster on, however, when she had to go to
her work, she met him outside the door of the house, where
he had evidently been waiting for some time. She pretended
not to see him, and walked quickly down the street. He
walked alongside of her in silence for a while before he spoke.
“ What's the meaning of all this ?”
Katey hurried still faster, dragging her poor shawl closer as
she went.
After another pause, Grinnell said again :
" You seem to have changed ?"
" I have.” She turned, as she spoke, and looked him full in his 
voice now.
Something told him that her mind was made up, and that
she knew or suspected his villainy ; and there was passion in his
voice now.
" It was mighty quick."
“ It was”
After a pause he said, so slowly and impressively, and with
such hidden purpose, that she grew cold as she listened :
“ People are often too quick ; it would sometimes be better
for them —and those belonging to them—if they were a little
slower.”
Seeing that she did not answer he changed his tone. 
“ A man can put his thumb on a fly— I wonder have flies
wives-or children ? He said the last words with a tone of
deadly malice.
Katey winced, but said nothing. Grinnell saw that he was
foiled, and all the hate of his nature spoke. He came closer to
Katey and hissed at her :
“ Take care! I am not to be got rid of so easily as you
think. I will be revenged on you for your scorn, bitterly 
revenged ; and even when I see you crawling in the dust at
my feet, I shall spurn you. Wait till you see your husband a
hopeless drunkard, and your children in the workhouse burial-cart,
and then perhaps you will be sorry that you despised 
me.”
Still seeing no signs of any answer, he added : 
“Very well. It's war-is it then? Good-bye to you,"
and, so saying, he turned on his heel and left her.
Katey worked all that day as if in a dream, and when her
work was over, shut herself up again with her children. The
next day was the same. She did not see Grinnell, but somehow
she mistrusted his silence even more than she feared his
malice.
When the time came for Jerry’s liberation, Katey was in 
waiting outside the prison door. Katey had made herself look
as smart as possible, and the bruises on her face were nearly
well. When Jerry caught sight of her, he started as if with a
glad surprise, but the instant after, as if from remembrance, a
dark frown gathered on his face, and he walked past her without
seeming to notice her present. Katey was cut to the heart, but,
nevertheless, she did not let her pain appear on her face. She
came and touched him on the shoulder and said :
“ Jerry, dear, here I am."
" I see you"-this in a harsh, cold voice. 
" Are you coming home; dear."
" Ay, a nice home.”
" Come home, Jerry."
“I will not. I must get something to make my hair grow,"
and without another word he strode away from her side, She
went home and wept bitterly.

Jerry came home drunk late that night, and neither then nor
the next morning would speak kindly to his wife. In the afternoon
he went to the theatre, but found that his place had been
given away.
He could get no work that suited him, and after a few days’
seeking, gave it up as a hopeless task, and took to drinking all
day long in Grinnell’s, where he was allowed credit.
As he earned no money, the entire support of the family once
more devolved on Katey, and once again the brave little woman
tried to meet the storm. Morning, noon, and night she worked,
when work could be got; but the long suffering and anxiety had
told on her strength, and, in addition, there had lately come a
new trial. Mrs. O'Sullivan had got a stroke of paralysis, and
her failing business had entirely deserted her. She now required 
help, and as Jerry could give none, had been removed to
the workhouse.
Day after day things got worse and worse. The room, up to
the present occupied, had to be given up as Katey could not pay
for it, and the change was to a squalid garret, bare, and bleak,
and cold. One by one the last necessary articles of furniture
vanished, till nothing was left but an old table and chair, and
some wretched bed gear, which had not been worth pawning,
and which now covered two wretched beds, knocked up by Jerry
with old boards. Jerry, too, had gone down and down. He
was not the scoff of his comrades, for he was too quarrelsome,
but he was their unconscious tool, and occupied a position somewhat 
akin to that of a vicious bull-dog ready to be set at any
comer. Grinnell gave him as much drink as he required, and
in every way tried to get him into his power.
Jerry often struck his wife now, and it was not due to his
efforts that he did not do it oftener. When he was drunk she
always kept as much as possible out of the way, often waiting
outside the door till he had fallen asleep, well knowing that if
he met her she would suffer violence. More than once he was
arrested either for drunkenness or assault, or both, and so
often that his heir never had time to a grow to a decent
length.
After this life had gone on for some time, and Katey was
showing signs of failing health, Grinnell tried to renew his
acquaintances. Katey told him plainly that she would have
nothing to do with him in any way, not even so far as speaking
to him was concerned. He answered with such a cruel threat
that Katey fainted. This was in the street, and whilst she was
still senseless a policeman appeared, sent by Grinnell, who had
told him that there was a drunken woman lying on the pathway.
The man, with the instinct of his pro‘ession, which sees
crime in every doubtful case, procured assistance, and brought
her to the station-house, which was close at hand. There she
was restored with a little care, but the charge of drunkenness
had been preferred against her, and she would not be allowed
to go home. The sergeant in charge said that he would allow
her to go home if she got bail. She did not know where to
turn to ; she could only sit down in the cell and cry. Presently
Grinnell, who know what would happen, arrived, and having
ascertained the state of the case went through the formality of
going bail, and Katey was released. Grinnell was waiting outside, 
and walked up the street with her. Katey walked so fast
that he had trouble to keep up with her.
“ I think you might speak to me after I have kept you out of
jail?” Katey did not answer. He waited, and then said,
“ Very well, go your own road. If anything happens to you
just think of me.” Then he walked away.
Katey did not sleep that night. She knew that on the
morrow she would have to stand in the dock charged with an
offence whose very name she hated; and she did not know
where in the wide world to look for help in case a fine should
be imposed. She could not look into the possibility of her
being sent to prison. It was too terrible both for herself and 
her children.
Early in the morning she rose. Jerry had not been home
all night, and so she had been unable to tell him of the
charge.
There was still one article in the room on which money could
be raised. This was Jerry’s tool-basket, which, with something 
of traditional reverence and something of hope, he had still

spared. He could not bear to pledge the tools he had worked
with, and both he and Katey felt that whilst there tools remained 
to his hand there was a prospect that things would
mend. Katey now regarded the tool-basket with longing eyes.
She felt that should she be sent to prison there was hunger and
suffering and, perhaps, ruin for her children, and a shame that
would make Jerry worse. She thought of pledging it, but the
thought arose to restrain her— " It would take away Jerry's
last hope—pull down the prop of his better life, and his wife’s
should not be the hand to do this at any cost.” And so she
spared the basket.
She had to wait a long time in the court, and when she was
put in the dock felt faintish. However, she nerved herself,
and answered all the questions put to her. The magistrate was
a kind and just one, and recognised truth in her story, and
ordered her to be discharged. She left the court crying, after
calling down a thousand blessings on his head.
When she came home she found the basket gone. Jerry had
taken it that very morning and pledged it to get money for
dissipation. This was a great blow to Katey, for she felt that
despair was gathering when Jerry had made up his mind to
part with his tools. Nevertheless, she felt in her heart a gleam
of comfort in the thought that she had acted rightly, and that
the prop had not been shorn away by her hand.
Jerry drank frightfully that day, and came home early in
the evening in a state of semi-madness. He rushed into the
room and caught Katey by the shoulder so roughly that she
screamed out, He said hoarsely—
" Is this true what I heard about you ?”
" What, Jerry? Oh, let go of me, you are hurting me.”
" What? I suppose you don't know. Well, I'll tell you—
that you were run in for bein’ drunk ?"
“ Let me explain, Jerry dear.”
“ Let me explain, Jerry dear. Explain away, but you won't
explain that out of my head. So this is my model wife that
abuses me for gettin’ drunk. This is the woman that thinks it
wrong and a sin. I know you now.”
Katey spoke in desperation—
" Jerry, listen to me. I was not drunk. I fainted in the
street, and they brought me to the station, but indeed, indeed
I was not drunk. I haven't tasted even a drop of liquor for
years—sure don’t you believe me, Jerry. I was discharged
this morning. The magistrate said there was no case against
me.”
" Ay, fine talk that. But I've heard about it already.
Grinnell told me all about it.”
" Grinnell told you! Oh, Jerry, take care what that man
tells you of me.”
“ What do you mean?"
The question was asked in a tone of bitter suspicion.
“ I mean that that wicked, wicked man hates me, and would
do me harm if he could.”
" What do you mean I say? Why does he hate you? Why
should he hate you ?”
Jerry was now so violent that Katey was afraid to tell him
lest he should do something desperate. Jerry grew more and
more violent, and finally struck her severely in the bosom with
his clenched fist, and ran out swearing horribly.
When he came home that night Katey searched in his pocket
and found the pawn ticket for his tools. The sum was only for
a few shillings, and she resolved that if she possibly could she
would redeem them, and then go herself and look for some work
for him.
Accordingly, next day she went out and pledged the only
thing left to her worth pledging—her wedding ring. It cost
her many an effort, and many a bitter tear, but for too long
bitterness had been her fortune to be deterred from action by
it now. She got back the tool basket, and left it on the table
where Jerry would see it when he returned.
So she waited and waited all through the long day.
Jerry was drinking at Grinnell’s, and was in such a state of
despondency that his liquor seemed to have hardly any effect an
him. Grinnell supplied him freely, for he had a design of
vengeance against Katey on hands, and desired to work Jerry,
whom he had fixed on as his tool, to the required pitch, Mons

was present, too, and Sebright, and Popham, and Dirty Dick,
who had been primed up to do Grinnell’s bidding.
By and by Jerry began to be excited, and grow quarrelsome.
Dirty Dick, at a sign from Grinnell, put himself in his way,
and an altercation arose. Jerry had a spite against the latter as
being the means of his being put in gaol for the first time, and
commenced hostilities at once.
“ Get out, you dog. You want to fight, I suppose. Best
mind out or I'll give you what I gave you before.”
“ You had better. Who laughed at the wrong side of his
mouth after that? Who got his hair cut—eh? Look, boys, it
hasn't grown since.”
Jerry began to get savage.
“Here, get out, I've murder in me.”
Grinnell, as he heard the latter remark, smiled softly to himself
—a smile that boded no good to poor Katey. Dirty Dick
ran behind Popham and peered over his shoulder in mock fear.
" Don’t stir, man, don't you see I’m goin’ to be murdered by
the long-haired man ?"
Jerry was getting furious, but they still continued to irritate
him. Dirty Dick said again—
“ How is your wife, Irishman? Have you been beating her
lately, or has she been run in for being drunk ?"
This was too much for Jerry. By a sudden rush he caught
the man by the throat, and before he could be torn away from him
had inflicted some desperate blows, one of which laid his cheek
open.
Then Dick lost his temper in turn and spoke out again, this
time without heeding what he said, for he merely meant to
wound.
“ Better go home end look after your wife.”
“ What does he mean?” asked Jerry.
“ I mean what I mean. Ask Grinnell ?”
The individual named seemed to grow paler. He saw that
his tool was reckless and feared for himself—both personally
from Jerry's violence, should he find out his treachery, and in
his character if such things should be known by the frequenters
of his house. He came from behind the bar and laid his hand
on Dick's shoulder.
Dirty Dick shook him off. "Let me alone,” he said.
Grinnell whispered to him—
“Hush, man, do you know what you are saying! Best keep
your temper or I'll put my thumb on you.”
“ Damn your thumb. Don’t threaten me. I'm reckless now.”
Grinnell saw that another row was the only way to check his
tongue, and struck him. The two men were at once seized
and held, and then Dick gave his tongue full play. He spoke of
Katey so foully that the men cried shame on him. He told
Jerry how all the neighbours ware talking of her and Grinnell.
How Grinnell had paid him to get up a fight, so that he might
be put in gaol and leave the field clear. He spoke with such
an air of truth, and all he said being true, except his foul
speeches about Katey, fitted so well into Jerry's knowledge of
things, that he took it all as true. There is no lie so damaging
as that which is partly true. The shock of hearing all these
things and believing them sobered Jerry, and he grew calm.
Seeing him so the men let him go, and having done so did not
attempt to lay hands on him, for there was a look in his face so
deadly, that they were afraid. He said no word ; he looked at
no one but Grinnell, and at him only one glance, which said,
“ Walt” so plainly, that Grinnell shuddered. Then he walked
out of the room, and there was silence.
Jerry walked home on set purpose, and entered the garret
where Katey, wearied out of her long waiting, lay asleep in bed.
The first things he saw was the tool basket on the table, beside
a bottle and glass. He pulled off his coat and flung it on the
table, and hurled the basket on to the floor. Katey woke with
the noise, and the children woke also, and sat up with their little
eyes fixed with terror. Jerry went to the bedside and caught
Katey's hand. " Getup,” he said. Katey was rising, when he
pulled her impatiently out on the floor, bringing down the bed.
Katey rose and stood before him. She saw that something
dreedful was the matter, and thought that he had got into more
fresh trouble,. She said to him lovingly, " Oh, Jerry, if there
is trouble, sure I am here to share it with you. Jerry—we will

begin fresh to-morrow. Look, dear, I have got back your
tools."
“How did you get them? Where did the money come
From?"
"Don't ask me, Jerry." 
“Where did the money come from—answer me at once, or”
—— He spoke so savagely that she grew cold.
"Jerry , I sold my wedding ring.”
Jerry laughed—the hard, cold laugh of a demon, “Time
for you to sell it.”
She saw that there was some hidden meaning in his words,
and asked him what he meant. "I mean that when you have
a husband in every man, you need no ring.”
" For shame, Jerry, for shame. What have I done to deserve
all this?”
Jerry grew furious. The big veins stood out on his forehead
and his eyes rolled.
" Done!" he said. “Done! What about Grinnell?”
Then without another word or if the very idea was too much
for him, he stooped and picked up a hammer which had rolled
out of the tool-basket.
Katey saw the act and screamed, for she read murder in his
eyers. He clutched her by the arm and raised the hammer ;
she struggled wildly, but he shook her off, and then, with a
glare like that of a wild beast, struck her on the temple.
She fell as if struck by lightning.
When he saw her lying on the floor, with the blood streaming
round her and forming a pool, the hammer dropped from his
hand, and he stood as one struck blind.
So he stood a moment, then knelt beside her and tried to
coax her back to life.
“ Katey, Katey, what have I done. Oh, God, what have I
done? I have murdered her. Oh? the drink ! the drink !
Why, didn’t I stay at home and this wouldn't have happened?”
He stopped suddenly, and, rushing over to the tool-basket,
took up a chisel, and with one fierce motion drew it across his
throat, and fell down beside the body of his wife.
THE END.
