THE SHOULDER
OF SHASTA
By
Bram STOKER
WESTMINSTER
ARCHIBALD CONSTABLE
 AND CO 1895

Copyright, 1895, in the United States o America,
according to the Act of Congress, by Bram Stoker.
All rights reserved.

TO ,
MY BROTHER
SIR THORNLEY STOKER,
PRESIDENT OF
THE ROYAL COLLEGE OF SURGEONS
IN IRELAND,
WITH
LOVE AND ESTEEM.


I.
When Mrs. Elstree was told that a suit-
able summer home had been found for her,
a certain weight was lifted from her mind.
The Doctor whom she had consulted in
San Francisco as to her daughter's health
was emphatic in his direction that Esse
should spend the coming summer high up
on some mountain side, and that she should
have iron and other natural tonics suitable
to her anemic condition. Dr. De Young
suggested that on some of the spurs of
Shasta, a spot might be found where the
air was sufficiently bracing, and where the
waters which lower down made the valleys
green and bright with their crystal purity
had the requisite volcanic qualities. Mrs.
1

Elstree had passed by Shasta Mountain
once, on her way from British Columbia,
and had fallen somewhat under its spell.
It is certainly a wonderful mountain, and
has a personality which is rare amongst
mountains. The Matterhorn has such a
quality, and so have Ranier and Mount
Hood; but mountains generally have as
little individuality as the items of a dish
of peas.
An energetic friend volunteered to make
search on Shasta, and after a fortnight’s
absence telegraphed :
“Have found very spot for you and
agreed purchase subject your approval—
made deposit; price all told two thousand
dollars; strongly advise purchase.” She
immediately wired :
“Purchase. Cheque sent payable to you.” ~
The friend was a wise, astute and business-
like agent, and when he returned to San
Francisco just after an even month’s absence
he brought with him the deeds of the estate.
2

As to its beauties he would say nothing
except an energetic “Wait. I may be
wrong!” When further pressed he added :
“I went there to purchase for you, not
myself; but if you don’t care about the buy,
wire me and I'll take the whole outfit at
ten premium !”
The journey from San Francisco seemed
to gain new beauty from experience. As
‘the train, after leaving Sacramento, wound
its way by the brawling river, its windows
brushed by the branches of hazel and mountain-ash,
 the whole wilderness seemed like
the natural pleasaunce of an old-world
garden. The road took its serpentine
course up and above its own track, over
and over again, and the bracing air made
the spirits of all the party more eager for a
sight of the new summer home. The only
exception was Miss Gimp, a good-hearted
lady who had been governess of Esse up to
the previous year, when she had arrived at
her sixteenth birthday, and was now her
3

mother’s secretary and companion. Miss
Gimp was not altogether satisfied with the
whole affair. She had not been consulted
about the purchase, she had not even been
asked, as an accessory after the fact, if she
approved ; and worst of all, she had not been
there to see that everything was in good
order. Mr. Le Maistre, who was Mrs.
Elstree’s male factotum, steward, butler,
agent, handy-man, engineer and courier,
had gone on a week before with the furniture 
and household effects of all kinds and
supplies wherewith to stock the pantry and
wine-cellar. He was to meet them at
Edgewood, with horses and ponies, and a
suitable guide to bring them to the new.
house. As he had taken the Saratoga
trunks, the present party went flying light
as to baggage, and had only to look after ~
their travelling bags and wraps. The live
stock was in the special care of Miss Gimp
and consisted of a terrier, three Persian
cats, and a parrot.
4

It was but a little after mid-day when
the train, winding up through the clearings,
drew near the station at Edgewood. The
scene was not altogether a promising one.
There were too many old meat and vegetable 
tins scattered about ; too many rugged
tree-stumps sticking out of theweedy ground,
already bare in patches under the heats of
the coming summer; insufficient attention
to pleasant detail everywhere, and an absolute 
lack of picturesqueness in the inclined
plane formed of rough timber beside the
track, and used for purposes of firing and
watering the engines. In fact, the whole
of the little clearing was in that stage of
development when beauty stands equally
apart from nature and utility. But there
was one sufficient compensation for all the
immediate squalor. Beyond, in the distance,
rose the mighty splendour of Shasta Mountain, 
its snow-covered head standing clear
and stark into the sapphire sky, with its
foothills a mass of billowy green, and its
5

giant shoulders seemingly close at hand
when looked at alone, but of infinite distance
when compared with the foreground, or the
snowy summit.
There is something in great mountains
which seems now and then to set at defiance
all the laws of perspective. The magnitude
of the quantities, the transparency of cloud-
less skies, the lack of regulating sense of
the spectator’s eye in dealing with vast
dimensions, all tend to make optical science
like a child’s fancy. Up at the present
height, nearly three thousand feet, the
bracing air began to tell on their spirits.
Even Esse’s pale cheeks began, to her
mother’s great delight, to show some colour,
and her dark eyes flashed with unwonted
animation, as they ranged over the splendid
prospect. She rushed up to Le Maistre,
who was signalling some men on the far
side of the clearing to bring the horses
which were tethered in the shelter of the
great pine-trees, and exclaimed :
6


" Where is our place? Point it out to me;
I am simply perishing to know all about
it!” Le Maistre turned round, and then
pointed to the northern shoulder of the
mountain.
“There, miss, on the left hand of the
mountain, a little way below that sharp
curve that looks like an old volcano!” Esse
looked, and her heart leaped high, On the
northern shoulder of the great mountain
lay a little plateau where could be seen in
the distance the green undulation of forest
with here and there a great conifer towering
out of the mass. As it lay to the western
side of the mountain, it was manifest that
it must command the whole range of the
seaboard. There was this added charm,
that just below it was a thin white line of
rushing water, so that there must be some
lake or tarn at hand, Mrs. Elstree shared
in the joy when Esse ran towards her
impulsively, calling out:
“Hurry, mother! hurry, or we'll never
7

get there!” It was many a long day since
Esse had shown so much interest in any-
thing, and the mother’s heart was glad that
already the mountain had begun its invigorating 
work.
It took a little time to get the little
caravan in order, and Mrs. Elstree utilized
the time in making Esse take something
to eat. A cup of tea was soon made ready
by the obliging wife of the station-master,
and some San Franciscan sandwiches
formed the rest of the improvised meal.
As soon as she could do so without altogether 
disappointing her mother, Esse
hurried out and found Le Maistre, with his
companions, ready to set out when the word
should be given. Le Maistre was himself
somewhat of a picturesque figure, for he
was a tall, fine man, with good features, and
a black beard tinged with grey; and he was
dressed in a suitable compromise between
his domestic occupation and the requirements 
of his new surroundings. He had
8

riding trousers and high boots, a flannel
shirt, and a short cutaway coat; altogether
he Jooked like a Western version of an
English squire. But his glories entirely
paled before the picturesque appearance
of his companions. Some of these were
Indians, bronze-coloured, black - haired,
high cheek-boned, lithe fellows who made
announcement to all men of the fact of their
being civilized by the nondescript character
of their attire. Some had old red coats of
the British infantry, and some the ragged
remains of fashionable trousers; but they
still wore some of their barbaric feathers,
trinkets and necklaces of bone and teeth;
and most of them had given themselves a
mild coat of paint in honour of the occasion.
They were all armed with rifles, and their
lassos hung over their arms,
The most picturesque figure of the group
by far was, however, a tall, handsome
mountaineer who stood leisurely fastening
a new whip lash beside a sturdy little
9

Indian pony at the head of the cavalcade.
He was dressed in a deerskin shirt marked
with the natural variations of the tanning,
and stained with weather, and with fringes
cut in its own stuff at neck and sleeve. It
was beautifully embroidered in front and
round the neck with fine Indian work of
bead and quill. He wore his fair hair long
so that it fell over his shirt collar and right
down his back. In his belt of dressed
deerskin was a huge bowie knife and two
revolvers; buckskin breeches and great
riding boots, with big Mexican spurs, completed 
his dress. The saddle of his mustang
was of the heavy cowboy pattern, with flaps
to cover the rider's feet; a Winchester
rifle and a curled-up raw-hide lasso lay
across the saddle. There was about him
a free and resolute bearing—the easy natural
carriage of one conscious of his power, and
that complete absence of fear, and even of
misgiving, which mark the King of Beasts
in his own sphere. Le Maistre called him up:
10

“Hi! Dick!” The man turned and
came forward with the long, easy, swaying
stride of a mountaineer, and as he came
raised his beaver-skin cap. Le Maistre
introduced him:
“This is Dick, Miss Esse. He is a
neighbour up at Shasta, and has kindly
undertaken to Mr. Hotteridge to look after
us all. It’s no mean thing either, Miss, in
a place where there are still lots of grizzlies,
and the Indians are—well, you see yourself
what they are! This man they call Grizzly
Dick because he’s killed so many!” Dick
took the compliment with true Indian
stoicism, and simply turned to Esse and
held out a huge brown hand. As she
placed her little one in it he wrung it with
such strength and exuberant vitality, that
she felt almost’ inclined to cry out as he
spoke:
“ How d’ye, Little Missy. Glad ter see
ye. You’n me'll be pards I guess. When
ye want anything, count me in every
11

time!” While he was speaking, Mrs,
Elstree drew close and held out her hand,
saying:
“Glad to see you, Mr. Grizzly Dick. I
hope you’re going to take me on in the
little game!” she showed her dazzling
white teeth, her blue eyes flooded with
merriment, and her tangle of gold hair shook
like the fleck of falling sunshine. Dick
rubbed his brown palm on the thigh of his
buckskin breeches, and then took her hand
in his with a grip that made her wince.
When she withdrew her cramped fingers,
she said:
“ By the way, are you Mr. Grizzly Dick
or Mr. Dick Grizzly? If that is your
friendly shake, I must look out for a real
grizzly when I want a mild one!” Dick
threw back his head and laughed with a
glee and a resonance which plainly showed
that not only his heart, but all his other vital
organs were sound. Then Esse and her
mother mounted, and Dick, sending two
12

Indians ahead, rode beside them on their
way to Shasta.
The sun was hot, and when they rode
through clearings between the trees, the air
seemed to hold the heat till it quivered
from the moist ground to the tree tops high
above them; but there was a delicious
sweetness and fragrance from the pines,
and the rarefied air of the high plateau
braced them to the pitch of joyousness.
Esse felt that she could never forget that
journey; there was such an adventurous,
picnicing air about everything, that she was
afraid of losing a moment of the time.
For most part of the journey of that day,
the snow cap of Shasta was hidden from
them by the great trees that seemed to
rise all round them; but every now and
then, on surmounting a ridge that whilst
its ascent was being made seemed itself
like a mountain, they caught a glimpse of
the noble dome before them rising in silent
grandeur, In the early part of the after-
13

noon their path was almost entirely through
the forest, where the hoofs of the ponies
fell silently on the mass of pine needles.
There were myriads of ant-hills, sometimes
rising in open spaces of the glade like little
brown mounds of moving items—coherent
masses of strenuous endeavour—or piled
against and around the fir-trees, up and
down whose rugged stems the armies of
the ants seemed to be ever moving. More
than once they had to make a long and
deep descent into a valley, in order to cross
a stream which looked from above like a
silver thread, but which when they reached
it had to be forded with the greatest care.
But still the way they were winning was
upward, and each time they emerged from
a stretch of forest the air was appreciably
colder, due both to the height they had
climbed, and to the oncoming night.
Towards evening, they picked out a spot
for a camp on a little spur of rocky ground
overlooking a deep valley. There were
14

here only a few tall pines whose bare and
rugged appearance bore witness to their
constant exposure. How they ever came
to be there was a wonder to Mrs. Elstree,
till she saw the spring of sweet water which
bubbled up close to their roots, and trickling 
away fell over the precipice into the
valley below. The instant the word was
given, the preparation for the bivouac
began. Some of the Indians took from
their ponies the material for a little bell-tent, 
such as soldiers use, and in what
appeared to Esse to be an incredibly short
time, had it fixed, pegged down and banked
up with earth from a trench which they
dug round it. At the same time some of
the others had got wood, and lighted a fire
over which they had hung the cooking-pot
for their evening’s meal. Le Maistre had
in the meantime busied himself with his
Own preparations for dinner. He had
lighted a small fire in a circle of loose
stones, and placed over it what looked like
15

a square box, which presently began to
give out appetizing odours. A rough table
was formed from a log, and campstools
were placed beside it; and before Esse
could get over her wonderment at the
whole scene, she found that dinner was
ready to be served. The evening was now
close at hand, and the beauty of the scene
arrested the hungry mortals who had the
privilege of seeing it. The sun was sinking 
like a great red globe into the Pacific,
and from the great height at which they
were, the rays reached them from over a
far stretch of the earth below them, now
shrouded in the black shadow of the evening. 
High above and beyond them, when
they looked back, the rosy light fell on the
snowy top of the mountain, and lit it with
a radiance that seemed divine.
And then the sun seemed to pass from
them, and they too were hidden in the
shadow of the night; but still the light fell
on the mountain till the darkness, creeping
16

up, seemed to wipe it out. When the last
point of light had faded from the white
peak, which the instant after seemed like
the ghost of itself, they looked down, and
seemed to realize that the night was upon
them.
Dinner was waiting them, so as soon
as the entire landscape was blotted out,
they bethought them of their hunger. By
the time they had sat down at the rude
table the Indians had lighted some pine
branches and stood round holding them as
torches.
It was a wonderful sight. . The red flare
of the burning pine threw up the red trunks
of the great pine-trees so that they seemed
to tower towards the very skies, until
they were lost in distance, and behind
them their black shadows seemed to fall
into the depths of the valley. Esse felt
like some barbaric empress, and could not
take her mind off the picturesque and
romantic aspect of the whole thing. It
17

seemed a piece of nightmare projection of
the present on the past whenever Le
Maistre, in the course of the meal, changed
his enamelled tin plates, or brought a fresh
variety of food from his mysterious box.
Mrs. Elstree was full of the beauty of the
scene; and as she looked at the happiness
on her daughter’s face, and noted the quick
eagerness which had already taken the
place of the habitual languor, she felt a
great peace stealing over her, much as sleep
creeps over a wearied child.
Esse did not stay longer at the table
than was necessary. In the thoughtlessness
of her youth she overlooked. the fact that
the others of the party were hungry, and,
only for her mother’s whispered warning,
she would at once have joined the group
awaiting round the camp fire the completion
of the cookery. The Indians sat on one
side of the fire and ate their meat half
cooked—part of a little deer which Dick
had shot, on purpose for the meal, just
18

before sunset. Le Maistre and Dick sat
together at the opposite side of the fire, and
took their dinner with the larger deliberation 
of the Caucasian. Still, there were
not many courses to be served, and it was
not long till both men had got out their
pipes and were beginning to enjoy a smoke.
The Indians had already lit their corncobb 
pipes, and were in high enjoyment,
squatted down close enough to the fire to
have begun the cookery of a white man.
When Esse saw the puffs of smoke she at
once went over to the fire. Le Maistre
jumped to his feet and took. his pipe from
his mouth ; but Dick sat still and smoked
on. Esse said, as she came close:
“If you stop smoking I shall go away ;
and I want to come and ask you things.”
Le Maistre at once sat down and resumed
his pipe, and Esse sat on a broken trunk
and watched the fire. All the while Miss
Gimp was sitting with Mrs. Elstree, asking
questions as to the best way of finishing a
19

new pattern of crochet which had hitherto
baffled her. Esse’s first question to Dick
was !
“Why have we chosen this spot to camp
in? Suppose a high wind were to come,
wouldn't it blow the tent over the precipice?
" That’s true enough, Little Missy, but
there ain’t no high wind a-comin’ up the
cañon to-night—nothin’ more than the sea-wind 
which is keepin’ the smoke off this
here camp. An’ even if it did come, well,
we've got fixin’s on to these trees that I
reckon ’ll see the night through. As to
choosin’ this spot, where is there a better?
See, we've shelter from the big trees, an’
water here to hand, so with a fire across
the neck of this rock, and one man to watch
it, where’s the harm to come from, and
how’s it goin’ to reach us?”
“I see,” said Esse, and was silent for a.
while, taking in and assimilating her first
lesson in woodcraft. After a little bit she
20

strolled away to the northern side of the
precipice, and stood at the edge, wrapt in
the glorious silence. A little way off the
great fire, which the Indians had heaped
with branches, leaped and threw lurid
lights on its own smoke, which, taken by the
west wind, seemed to bend over and disappear 
into the darkness of the valley like
falling water. Overhead was the deep
dark blue of the night, spangled with stars
that seemed through the clear air as if one
had only to stretch out a hand to touch
them ; and high away to the south rose the
snow-cap of Shasta gleaming ghostly white.
After a while the silence itself became
oppressive, as though the absence of sound
were something positive which could touch
the nervous system. Esse listened and
listened, straining her ears for any sound,
and at length the myriad and mystic sounds
of the night began to be revealed; the
creaking of branches and the whispering
rustle of many leaves; the fall of distant
21

water; and now and then the far away
sound of some beast of the night began to
come through the silence. And so, little
by little, the life of the night, which is as
ample and multitudinous as the life of the
day, had one but knowledge to recognize
its voices, became manifest; and as the
experience went into Esse’s mind, as it
must ever go into the mind of man or
woman when it is once realized, the girl to
whom the new life was coming felt that she
had learned her second lesson in woodcraft.
And so she sat thinking and thinking,
weaving from the very fabric of the night
such dreams as are ever the elixir of a
young maiden’s life, till she forgot where
she was, and all about the wonders of the
day that had passed, and wandered at will
through such starlit ways as the future,
opened for her.
She was recalled to her surroundings by
some subtle sense of change around her.
22

The noises of ‘the night and the forest
seemed to have ceased. At first she thought
that this was because her ears had become
accustomed to the sounds; but in a few
seconds later she realized the true cause;
the moon was rising, and in the growing
light the sounds, which up to then had
been the only evidence of Nature’s might,
became at once of merely ordinary importance. 
And then, all breathless with delight,
Esse, from her high coign of vantage on
the. brow of the great precipice, saw what
looked like a ghostly dawn.
Above the tree-tops, which became articulated 
from the black mass of a distant
hill as the light shone through the rugged
edge, sailed slowly the great silver moon.
With its coming the whole of Nature seemed
to become transformed. The dark limit of
forest, where hill and valley were lost in
mere expanse, became resolved in - some
uncertain way into its elements. The pale
light fell down great slopes, so that the
23

waves of verdure seemed to roll away from
the light and left the depths of the valleys
wrapped in velvety black. Hill-tops un-thought 
of rose in points of light, and the
great ghostly dome of Shasta seemed to
gleam out with a new, silent power.
Esse had begun to lose herself again in
this fresh manifestation of Nature’s beauty
when her mother’s voice recalled her to
herself. She went over to the tent and
found her busily engaged with Miss Gimp
in arranging matters for the night. The
tent was so tiny that there was just room
for the three women to lie comfortably on
the piles of buffalo and bear rugs which
were laid about; and Esse having seen her
own corner fixed, went out and stood by
the fire where Dick and Le Maistre still
sat smoking and talking. She had taken
a bearskin robe with her, and this she
spread on the ground, near enough to hear
the men talk, and sat on it, leaning back
on one elbow, and gazed into the fire.
24

She did not feel sleepy ; but sleep had been
for many 2 day an almost unknown luxury.
For hours every night had she lain awake
and heard the clocks chime, and sometimes
had seen the dark meet with the dawn, but
when sleep had come, it had come unwillingly, 
with lagging and uncertain step.
But for very long she had not known that
natural, healthy sleep which comes with
silent footstep, and makes no declaration of
his intent. The bright firelight flickered
over her face, now and again making her
instinctively draw back her head as a collapsing 
branch threw out a fresh access of
radiance. And she thought and thought,
and her wishes and imaginings became
wrought into her strange surroundings, All
at once she sat up with sudden impulse -
as she heard Dick’s voice in tones of
startling clearness :
“Guess Little Missy’s fallen asleep.
You'd better tell her mother to get her off
to bed!” With the instinctive obedience of
25

youth and womanhood to the voice of
authority she rose, swaying with sleep, and
saying good-night passed into the tent.
Here she found her mother wrapping herself 
in her blanket for the night. Esse
made her simple toilet, and in a few minutes
she too was wrapped in her blanket and
was settling down to sleep. Then Miss
Gimp put out the dark lantern which was
close to her hand, and in a very few
minutes, what she would have denied as
being a snore, proclaimed that she slept.
Mrs. Elstree was lying still, and breathed
with long, gentle breaths. Esse could not
go to sleep at once, but lay awake listening.
She heard some sounds as of men moving,
but nothing definite enough to help her
imagination in trying to follow what was
happening outside. She raised herself
softly, and unlooping one of the flaps of the
tent looked out.
The fire still blazed but with the strong
settled redness, that shows that there is a
26

solid base of glowing embers underneath
the flame, and round it were stretched:
several dark figures wrapped in - gaily
coloured blankets. In the whole camp
was only one figure upright; at the neck of
the little rocky promontory stood a tall
figure leaning on a Winchester rifle, seeming
to keep guard over the camp. He was too
far off to be touched by the firelight, but the
moonlight fell on the outline of his body
and showed the long fair hair falling on the
shoulders of his embroidered buckskin
shirt. When he turned she could see the
keen eagle eyes looking out watchfully.
Esse crept back to her bed, and, with a
contented sigh, fell asleep.
27

II.
Esse became awake all at once, and,
throwing off the buffalo robe which covered
her, opened the flap of the tent and looked
out. Over everything was the cold light
of the coming dawn. The Indians were moving 
about and piling up again the fire, which
was beginning to answer their attention
with spluttering crackles, and Grizzly Dick
was blowing a tin mug of steaming coffee
which Le Maistre had just handed to him.
Esse hurried her toilet in a manner which
would have filled Miss Gimp with indignant
concern, had she been awake, and stole out
of the tent. She went over to the eastern
side of the plateau, and stood there, looking
expectantly for the coming dawn. It was
something of a shock when Dick handed
to her a mug of hot coffee saying :
28

“Catch hold! Guess, Little Missy, ye’d
better rastle this or the cold of the morning
‘ll get ye, sure!” She took the coffee, and,
although at first she felt it a sort of sacrilege 
to superadd the enjoyment of its consumption 
to the more ethereal pleasure of
the sea of beauty around her, was glad
a moment later for the physical comfort
which it gave her. As she looked, the
eastern sky commenced to lose its pallor;
and then, softly and swiftly, the whole
expanse of the horizon began to glow rosy
red, As the light grew, the stretch of
forest below began to manifest itself in a
sea of billowy green. Wave after wave
of forest seemed to fall back into the
distance, till far away, beyond a great
reach of dimness which seemed swathed in
mist, the myriad peaks of the Rocky
Mountains began to glow under the coming
dawn, And then a great red ray shot
upward, as though some veil in the sky had
been rent, and the light of the eternal sun
29

streamed through. Esse clasped her hands
in ecstasy, and a great silence fell on her.
This silence she realized as strange a moment 
after, for with the first ray of sunlight
all the rest of Nature seemed to spring into
waking life. Every bird—and the forest
seemed to become at once alive with them
—seemed to hail the dawn with the solemn
earnestness of a Mahomedan at the voice of
the muezzin, and the full chorus of Nature
proclaimed that the day had come. Esse
stood watching and watching, and drinking 
in consciously and unconsciously all the
rare charm and inspiration of Nature, and
a thousand things impressed themselves
on her mind, which she afterwards realized 
to the full, though at the moment
they were but unconsidered items of a vast
mutually-dependent whole. Like many:
another young girl of restless imagination,
at once stimulated and cramped by imperfect 
health, she had dipped into eccentric
forms of religious thought. Swedenborgianism
30

had at one time seemed to her to
have an instinctive lesson which was conveyed 
in some more subtle form than is
allowed of by words. Again, that form of
thought, or rather of feeling, which has
been known as of the “Lake School,”
had made an impression on her, and she
had so far accepted Pantheism as a creed
that she could not dissociate from the
impressions of Nature the idea of universal
sentience. What the moral philosophers
, call “natural religion,” and whose methods 
of education are of the emotions,
had up to the present satisfied a soul which
was as yet content to deal with abstractions.
This content is the content of youth, for
things concrete demand certain severities
of thought and attitude which hardly
harmonize with the easy-going receptivities 
of the young. At the present the
whole universe was to Esse a wonderland,
and its potentialities of expression and of
deep meanings which she yearned for, and
31

she could not realize — and did not in her
ignorance think of the subject — proved to
her that the Children of Adam, being finite
in all their relations, can only find happiness
in concrete reality. The religion of the
men of Athens who set up their altars
“To The Unknown God” was a type of
the restless spirit of an unsatisfied longing, 
and not merely a satisfied worship
of something beyond themselves. Not
seldom in Greece of old did youth or
maiden pass weary hours in abasement
before a statue of Venus or Apollo,
hoping for the incarnation of the god. So
Esse in her unsatisfied young life watched
and waited at the shrine of Nature, not
knowing- what she sought or hoped for,
whilst all the time the deep, underlying,
unconscious forces of her being were
making for some tangible result which
would complete her life.
Now, as she stood alone in the springing
dawn, with the entire world seemingly at
32

her feet, she began to feel that in the whole
scheme of Nature was one deep underlying
purpose in which each thing was merely a
factor; that she herself was but a unit with
her own place set, and the narrow circle of
her life appointed for her, so that she might
move to the destined end. It might be
destiny, it might be fate, it might be simply
the accomplishment of a natural purpose ;
but whatever it might be, she would yield
herself to the Great Scheme, and let her feet
lead her where instinct took them. And as
she sighed in relief at not having to struggle
any more—for so the emotion took her — she
found herself repeating Coleridge’s lines :
“And if that all of animated Nature
Be but organic harps diversely framed,
That tremble into thought as o’er them sweeps
Plastic and vast one intellectual breeze —
At once the soul of each and God of all.”
It was not, she felt, all fancy that the gentle
sweet wind of the dawn took the pine-
needles overhead, and rustled them in some
sort of divine harmony with the poet's song,
33

Esse’s mood of semi-religious, semi-emotional 
exaltation was brought to an end by
Dick, who came and stood beside her, and
said, as he pointed with a wide, free sweep
of his arm to the whole eastern panorama:
“Considerable of a purty view, Little
Missy !”
“Oh, beautiful, beautiful! How you
must love it who live here in the midst of
it all. I suppose you were born on Shasta?”
Dick laughed :
“ Guess not much! I was raised somewhere 
out on the edge of the Great Desert.
Mother couldn’t abide mountings, and kept
dad down in the bottoms.”
“Then how did you ever come to
Shasta ?”
“Wall, dad he lived by huntin’ an’ trappin’, 
an’ when the Union Pacific came
along, he found the place got too crowded ;
so he made tracks for Siskiyou! But,
Lordy! it didn’t seem to be no time at all
till the engineers began runnin’ new lines
34

between Portland and Sacramento. So
says dad: ‘If the Great American Desert
ain’t good enough to let a man alone in, an’
if he gets crowded out of the chaparral
at Siskiyou, then durn my skin but I'll try
the top of the mountings,’ so we up sticks
and kem up here!”
“ And your mother?” asked Esse, sympathetically; 
“how did she bear the
change ?”
“ Lor’ bless ye! she didn’t hev no change;
why before we ever went to Siskiyou, she
up an’ took a fever, an’ died. Me an’ dad
scooped a hole for the old lady ’way down
by One Tree Creek. Dad said as how he
didn’t see as she'd be able to lie quiet even
there, with fellers bringin’ along schoolhouses, 
an’ dancin’ saloons, an’ waterworks,
and sewin’ machines, an’ plantin’ them
down right atop of her. Ye see, Little
Missy, the old man were that fond of
nobody that he didn’t take no stock whatever 
in fash’nable life—like you an’ me!”
35

A ghost of a smile flickered at the corners
of Esse’s mouth; she was not herself in
any way addicted to “society” life, but
rather longed for the wilderness — in an
abstract form, and of course free from
discomforts ; but between Dick and herself
there was so little in common—that was
Dick’s very charm—that she wondered what
might be the nature of that fashion which
took them both within its limits to the
exclusion of others. She was, however,
interested in the man, and curious as to his
surroundings, so she made an interrogative
remark :
“Of course you love living on the
mountain; and never go into a town at all?”
“ Never go into a town! I should smile!
Only whenever I can, and then, oh Lordy!
but that town comes out all over red spots!”
Again Esse made another searching remark :
“I suppose your wife goes with you!”
Dick laughed a loud, aggressive, resonant
36

laugh, which seemed to dominate the whole
place. The Indians, hearing it, turned to
gaze at him, and as Esse looked past his
strong face, jolly with masculine humour
and exuberant vitality, at their saturnine
faces, in which there was no place for, or
possibility of a smile, and contrasted his
picturesqueness, which was yet without
offence to convention, with their unutterably 
fantastic, barbarous, childish, raggedness, 
she could not help thinking that the
Indian want of humour was alone sufficient
to put the race in a low place in the scale
of human types. Dick continued to roar.
“My wife,” he said, “my wife. Ha! ha!
ha! Wall, that’s the best joke I heard
since I see the Two Macs at Virginia City
a twelvemonth ago.” Then he became
suddenly grave. “Askin’ yer pardon,
Little Missy, fur laffin’ at yer words, but the
joke is, I ain’t got no wife. No sir! not
much!” Here he turned away to avoid
wounding her feelings, and his face was
37

purple with suppressed laughter as he
passed beyond the fire, where she heard
his laughter burst out afresh amongst the
Indians. Esse looked after him with a
smile of amused tolerance. With a woman’s
forbearance for the opposite sex — whether
the object deserved it or not does not
matter—she felt herself drawn to the man
because of her forgiveness of him. The
laughter, however, had completely dispersed
the last fragments of her pantheistic imaginings, 
and she realized that the day was
well begun; and so she went to the tent
to her mother.
When she opened the flap and entered,
she felt a sense of something out of
harmony. The white walls of the tent
were translucent enough to let in sufficient
light to show up everything with sufficient
harshness to be unpleasant. Mrs. Elstree
and Miss Gimp still slept; the former
lying on her side, with her golden hair in
a picturesque tangle, and her bosom softly
38

rising and falling; the latter on her back,
with her mouth open, and snoring loudly.
Her hair was tightly screwed up over her
rather bald forehead, and in her appearance
seemed to be concentrated all that was
hard in Nature, heightened by the resources
of art. Esse bent down and kissed her
mother, and shook her gently, telling her
that it was time to get up. Then she
woke Miss Gimp, with equal gentleness,
but with a different result. Mrs. Elstree
had waked with a smile, and seeing before
her her daughter’s bright face, had drawn
it down and kissed her. Miss Gimp woke
. with a snort, which reminded Esse of one
time when her umbrella stick had snapped
in a high wind, and, after scowling at Esse,
turned over on her other side with a vicious
dig at her pillow and an aggressive grunt.
A moment later, however, the instinctive
idea of duty, and work to be done, came
to her, and instantly she was on her feet
commencing her toilet; then Esse went out
39

and sat by the fire, till presently her mother
joined her, and later Miss Gimp, and they
all fell to on the savoury breakfast which
Le Maistre had ready for them.
Whilst they were eating, the Indians
had struck the tent; and very shortly the
little cavalcade was on its way again under
the spreading aisles of the great stone-pines, 
and tramping with a ghostly softness
on the carpet of pine needles underfoot.
The first part of the journey took them
down into the valley overhung by their
camping place of the night, but after cross-
ing the stream which ran through it, they
began a steady ascent which continued for
hours. It was very much steeper than the
ascent of the previous day, and the men all
dismounted so as to relieve the ponies.
Esse, too, insisted on walking, and by a
sort of natural gravitation found herself at
the head of the procession, walking alongside 
Dick, who held the rein of his pony
over his arm. Hour after hour they
40

tramped on slowly, only resting for a little
while every now and again. At last, when the
noon was at hand, they emerged from the -
forest on a bare shoulder of rock. At first
the glare of the high sun dazzled Esse’s
eyes, focussed to the semi-gloom of the
woods; but Dick and the Indians felt no
such difficulty, and the former, pointing up
in the direction of the Cone, said: ;
“Look, Little Missy. See where the
tall pine rises above! There’s where you're
bound for, and the shaft of thet thar pine
will tell you what o'clock it is.” Esse
clapped her hands with delight, for the
home which she had so looked forward to
was in their sight. It lay on a level plateau
below where the belt of verdure stopped.
It was still a considerable way off, and lay
some seven or eight hundred feet above
them, but a fair idea could be had of its
location. It was just on the northern
edge of the shoulder of the great mountain,
and, so far as they could judge, must have
41

a superb view. Esse was all impatience
to get on, and her mother shared in her
anxiety. She, too, wanted to see in what
kind of place fortune had fixed her for the
months to come. From this on, the trees
did not grow so densely, and here and there
were patches of cleared space, where the
stumps of trees, some bearing the mark of
axes, and some of fire, dotted the glade.
The nature of the ground did not permit
of their seeing the place of destination
again till, after a long spell of upward
ascent, followed by a stiff bit of climbing,
they emerged on the northern edge of the
plateau. Then Mrs. Elstree and Esse
agreed that they had never seen any place
so ideally beautiful.
The plateau was like an English park,
ringed round with the close belt of pine
forest. Great trees, singly and in clusters,
rose here and there from a sward of emerald
green, and through it ran a bright stream,
entering from the south, and after curving
42

by the east, fell away to the western edge
of the plateau over a shelf of rock, Where
the stream enteredit fell from another great
rock, making a waterfall sufficiently high
that its spray took rainbow colours where
the sunlight struck it, and fell into a great
deep pool, seemingly cut by Nature's forces
from the solid rock. In the centre of the
plateau was a great circular hedge of prickly
cactus and bear-thorn, inclosing the house
in a garden of some two acres in extent.
The house was small, and built solidly of
logs, with a veranda all round it, and many
creepers climbed over it. Right in front
of its northern aspect grew a giant stone-pine, 
which towered up more than a hundred
feet without a break, and whose wide-spreading 
branches threw a flickering shadow
on the sward as its very height made it
tremulous.
Esse was speechless, and clasped her
mother’s arm tightly, and then began to
thump her shoulders, as had been her habit
43

when a little child, and she had been unable
in any other way to express her feelings of
delight. Dick spoke:
“Well, Little Missy, ain’t it a purty location; 
though why you should thump the old
lady I don’t quite see. Say, if ye want
physical exercise of that kind why don’t
ye lam inter me! Guess I’m built more
suitable fur it than that purty creetur!”
Mrs. Elstree had been slightly annoyed
at being spoken of as an old lady, but
Dick’s compliment set matters straight
again, and she shook her golden head at
him, and her blue eyes danced as she
said :
“It's evident, Mr. Grizzly, that you don’t
understand the feelings of a mother when
her child is happy. You are not a mother!”
“Guess not!” roared Dick; “not by a
jug full!” and he slapped his thigh, and
laughed with that infectious laugh of his.
Esse did not altogether like to hear him
laugh, especially without good cause; so
44

to divert the subject she asked him how
the tree could tell what hour it was.
“Come and see,” answered Dick, as he
threw the reins of his pony to an Indian,
and strode towards the house, followed
eagerly by the two women, holding arms.
When they got near the hedge they
turned to the right, and followed it for a
little time. On the west side they found a
gateway, which Dick opened. The gate
seemed ridiculously massive for such a
place, and was studded all over with sharp
steel spikes.
“What on earth are they for?” asked
Esse, pointing. The answer was as complete 
as it was short.
“Bars! Things didn’t uster be as they
are now!” They all went inside the inclosure, 
and as they drew in front of the great
pine Dick spread out his arms, and with a
comprehensive sweep took in the whole
circle of the compass. “ Look, Little Missy,”
said he; ‘tell me now what o’clock it is?”
45

Esse looked around, and up and down,
but could see no sign of any time-keeping
appliance. She was disturbed by a quick
little cry from her mother :
“Oh, look! Esse! look! look! the
whole garden is a sun-dial!” Esse looked,
and sure enough all around her, at intervals,
rose groups of tall, slim pines, but at varied
distances, so that there was no appearance
of a ring. Some of them leaned from the
perpendicular in a queer way, and yet all
were so stranged that a perfect sun-dial
with Roman numerals was formed, and the
shadow of the great pine fell with the
movement of the whirling earth, and told
the tale of flying hours. There was a long
pause, and Esse turned to Dick.
“Dick, did you do this?” Again the
hunter slapped his thigh in mirth, and his
wild, resonant cachinnation seemed to
sound louder than ever, as though there
were some containing acoustic quality in
the prickly fence. Esse got somewhat
46

nettled, and there was a red spot on each
cheek as she said:
“I don’t see much to laugh at in that. I
don’t see why you can’t answer a simple
question without being rude!” Dick
sobered at once, and, with a grave courtesy 
that seemed like a knightly act by a
natural man, took off his cap and bowed
his head.
“ Askin’ yer pardon, Little Missy. I'd
no mind to be rude, nor no call to. Why,
I'd not a thought of that in a thousand
years. . That was all done by the old
doctor who found this place, and built the
house, and fixed up the fence and the
garden. Took a mighty deal o’ pleasure
in it too, seemin'ly. Every year he was
here he left it less and less, till at the end
he wouldn’t ha’ quitted, not for a farce-
comedy speciality an’ a comic-opera troupe
rolled inter one! ’Pears to me, Little Missy,
that you've come along jest in time, for
there’s many as would like to hev the place
47

if onst they knowed of it.” Esse made no
other reply than:
“Come along, Dick, and show me the
view. I want to see the Pacific from up
here.” Without a word Dick strode away
to the rocky ledge over which the stream
tumbled. As they got near it Miss Gimp,
who had been grizzling with the indifference 
of all to her presence, overtook them,
and said in a tone which all could hear :
“ Wants to show her ail the kingdoms of
the earth from a high place! We know
what to make of him!” and she snorted.
Esse looked at her with an amused smile,
but Mrs. Elstree felt annoyed, and, in order
to get rid of her, asked her to go into the
house and see Mrs. Le Maistre, who was
the housekeeper, as to the arrival. She
complied with outward calmness, but was
shortly afterwards seen going to the house
with several Indians. One of them carried
the cats, and another the dog, while a third
held out at arm’s length the cage of the
48

parrot, which, from its talking, he evidently
regarded with some very remarkable awe.
She was letting off steam by poking the
Indians in the back with the point of her
umbrella. They did not resent it, but took
it with that outward stoicism which marked
their bearing. This aggravated her even
more, and she poked the harder; but still
the Indians did not resent it. She would
have been not a little mortified had she
known the cause of their forbearance.
Mrs. Elstree and Esse stood for a long
time looking at the view, and then Dick
took them northward along a ledge of rock
behind the belt of trees. Here there was.
a high, bare rock with a flat top, and on it
was a natural seat of rock, resting whereon
they looked round the whole horizon,
except where the giant bulk of Shasta shut
out the southern aspect.
Esse was in a trance of delight. Below
her the mountain fell away in billows of
green, through which the rivers ran like
49

threads of silver. Far away, where the
whole landscape became merged in one
dark, misty expanse, she could see the
Pacific, a grey mass of nothingness, fringed -
on the near side with the jagged edge
of the coast, and beyond, the arc of the
horizon. Here and there in the plain
hills rose and valleys dipped; but their
heights and depths were lost in the distance, 
and had no more individual existence 
than the pattern of a carpet. Then
she looked south, and her eye travelled up
the steep side of the mountain, passing
from the lessening fringe of forest to where
the hardy trees stood out starkly one by
one in the isolation of their strength to
endure; up the rolling steep where rushes
and scanty herbage grew in the shelter of
the rocks; upward still, where the bare
rock stood out from the grey mass of primeval 
rubble wherein is no vital strength,
and where the snow and ice ran down in
spurs into the sheltered gorges; upward
50

still, to where the snow lay like a winding-sheet, 
and where the ruggedness of Nature
was softened into flowing lines. And then
- her eye lit on the mighty curve of the
mountain top, whose edges, as the high
sun took them, were fringed with dazzling
light. She turned to her mother, and with
a sort of hysterical cry fell over against her,
clasping her in her arms and hiding her
tears on her bosom. “ Take me in,
mother,” she said; “I am tired, tired! and
it is too sweet to see all at once!” Mrs.
Elstree felt her arms relax, and bent down
anxiously; Esse had fainted. The mother
knew of her long illness, and was not altogether 
surprised, but Dick was overcome
with anxiety, as strong natural men are
where womankind and her weakness are
concerned, and he said, in an awe-struck
whisper :
“The poor, purty little thing! Let me
carry her for ye, marm. T’ll bear her
very gently!” Mrs. Elstree nodded, and
51

he took her up in his powerful arms as
though she was a baby, and together they
went softly to the house.
At the door they were met by the entire
household with Mrs. Le Maistre at the
head; Miss Gimp rushed out on seeing
the body of Esse carried limply, and began
to scream and call out:
“Ts she dead? Is it an accident? Oh,
my child, my child!” and she beat her
hands wildly together. Miss Gimp was a
good creature in spite of her eccentricity,
and Grizzly Dick summed her up fairly
when he said: “ The old girl is a crank
from Crankville; but her heart is in the
right lo-cation all the same.” Mrs. Elstree
tried to soothe her, and raised her hand as
she said :
“Hush, hush! she has only fainted.
The journey and the hot sun have been
too much for her. She will be all right
presently!” Then Mrs. Le Maistre, who
had been her nurse, took her in her strong
52

arms, and carried her in, not without protest 
from Dick.
“ Let me carry her, marm. Purty Little
Missy, I’ll be as gentle as her mother!”
As they entered the doorway Esse opened
her eyes, and, after looking at them all fora
few seconds, in a dazed sort of way, said
suddenly, whilst a bright blush took the
place of her pallor :
“Oh, let me down, I’m all right now!
Don’t let Dick see me like this ; he’ll think
me a baby!” Miss Gimp sniffed as she
looked over at Dick, but said nothing, for
it was borne in upon her, swiftly but conclusively, 
that he was a mighty fine figure
of a man.
Towards evening, when, after a lie down
and a cup of tea, Esse was feeling quite
restored, she asked her mother if she might
go out and see the sunset. Without a
word, Mrs. Elstree tied a scarf over her
head, for the evening was growing chilly
at this altitude, and taking her daughter's
53

arm they strolled out towards the entrance
gate and across the plateau. Once more
they sat upon the rocky seat and looked
out westward. Once again they saw the
sun sink, a red globe, into the western sea,
and the dark shadow of night climb up the
hill-side, and the summit of Shasta gleam
ghostly white.
And then they went in.
54

III.
For several weeks the life on the Shasta
was ideal, and Mrs. Elstree’s heart rejoiced
to see the changes it was working in Esse.
Her languidness seemed to have disappeared, 
and she was now bright, brisk,
and alert, for ever devising new ways of
passing the time, and helping with invention
and design to improve the place. Le
Maistre, who had a pretty mechanical
aptitude of his own, had designed a new
water supply for the house, and was already
carrying it into execution. From the rocky
basin which stood up the mountain nearly
three hundred feet above the house, he
was to lay a series of logs, pierced with
great augers, now being brought up from
San Francisco on purpose. These were
to be joined together, and would convey so
55

easily applicable as well as so abundant a
supply that Esse had designed several
fountains for round the house, each of which
would throw up a fair sheet of water to a
considerable height. Thus from whatever
way the wind blew, something of the cooling
spray could be borne to the house. In this
work Dick was of great use, not only by
his lending a hand himself, but by being
able to induce the Indians to help. A few
nondescript settlers of lower down the
mountain were glad to earn a little money,
and altogether muscular power was not
wanting. Dick was only present now and
again, for his hunting pursuits took him
away sometimes for a few days at a time.
But his time was not wasted in so far as
the household was concerned, for it was he
who kept the larder supplied with fresh
meat. There was always abundance of all
sorts of game, and a very liberal supply of
necessaries had been laid in; the garden
afforded a good supply of fruit and vegetables,
56

and altogether no need for comfort
was lacking.
Esse’s great amusement was with the
Indians. She very soon learned that their
village was in a deep cleft which lay between 
the house and the western side of
the mountain. As a little rocky peak lay -
between them, it was not possible to see
even the smoke of their fires. On the
near side to them, but on the far side of
the rock, Dick's cabin stood on a rocky
shelf beside a spring. From it he could
see the whole western slope of the mountain,
and by it he could on his many journeys
make for the most direct way home. His
proximity kept the Indians in order; for
with the dominance of a Caucasian he
made himself to some degree regulator of
his neighbour’s affairs. Indeed, he stood
with regard to the Indians somewhat in
the relation of a British justice of the peace
to the village community. This dominance
was a great comfort to Mrs. Elstree, who
57

had at the first some doubts as to the
physical security of her party, removed so
far as they were from any means of help.
An incident which occurred shortly after
her arrival had not tended to allay her
fears.
She had been taking a siesta in a hammock 
slung between two of the sun-dial
trees, and was in the semi-lethargic condition 
of one who is sleeping for mere
luxury, not need - such a sweetly overpowering 
condition as is only to be felt in
the open air — when she noticed one of the
Indians approach stealthily. He was one
of the most brainless looking of the tribe,
and in general a sort of butt of the rest.
His face was in fact only removed a degree
above idiocy, and this by the cunning
twinkle of his eyes. His character, as it
often happens amongst Indians, was shown
in his name, Hi’-oh’, which means Heap
(or always) Hungry in the Shoshonie
dialect. Half amused, and half in that
58

adventurous state of mind when fear becomes 
a sort of intellectual tickling — a
sort of continuation of her dreams — Mrs.
Elstree lay still, pretending slumber. He
approached with increasing stealthiness,
keeping always behind some tree trunk,
till he had reached the head of the hammock. 
Now, when he was out of her sight,
Mrs. Elstree became seriously alarmed, but
by a great effort she lay still, though her
heart beat like a trip-hammer. The seconds
seemed to be years, and in the agonizing
suspense she could hear—or thought she
could—the blood running through the
veins of her neck. Then slowly and
cautiously a pair of copper-coloured hands
stole gently down the netting of the
hammock, and with deft movement the
fingers began inserting themselves under
her head. With a tremendous effort she
lay quite still, for she felt that it was too
late now to do anything if harm to her
were intended. Her only grain of consolation
59

and it necessitated a new effort to
suppress the smile which it caused — was
that her scalp would be different from the
general run of such curios, She had once
seen, in a chest full of scalps, in the collection 
of a friend who was an amateur of
Indian trophies, a scalp of a woman's
golden hair, and she herself, in common
with all who had seen it, felt more pity for
the late owner of those yellow tresses, than
for all the original proprietors of the dark
ones put together. She could in her
mind’s eye see her own tresses hanging up
in a wigwam, or helping to trim a buck’s
festal costume, and already she had begun
to hope that his earth-colours would match
her hair. Here her thoughts were cut
short by a strange sensation. The hands
were lifting her head and holding it balanced;
then it was laid down again softly,
and the hands were withdrawn. Once more
she conquered a strong impulse to start up,
for she thought it better not to appear to have
60

noticed. So she lay still awhile, breathing
softly. Then she yawned, raised her arms,
turned over, and as if waking, assumed a
sitting posture. She looked around keenly;
but there was no sign of an Indian about
the place.
At first she was a little startled, and then
a queer kind of doubt came upon her as to
whether she had not been asleep and
dreamed the whole thing. As there was
no trace of an Indian, she remained in
doubt, not liking to tell any one, lest it
might cause ill feeling. Dick was away;
but the day after he returned, and she took
the opportunity of being alone with him to
ask his opinion of the transaction. To her
surprise, but also to her relief, Dick burst
into his characteristic roar of laughter.
“Wall, durn my skin!” said he, “but
that is the all-fredest funniest rascal I ever
kem across. I guess now what was in
Heap Hungry’s thick head when he made
a proposition to me that we should work a
61

gold mine together : ‘ Hi’-oh’ knows,’ sez he,
of a gold mine, much gold on top. If
much gold on top, mucher gold under that,
waugh!’ He is a cunnin’ beggar, too;
wouldn't take any chances over his gold
mine, but wanted to make cert if it was
gold.”
“But I don’t understand!” said, Mrs.
Elstree. Dick slapped his thigh again in
his emphatic way, and roared with laughter :
“Why, marm, don’t ye see. You was
the gold mine! With the golden hair atop,
he thought as how yer skull would be gold,
an’ he wanted to make sure before ringin’
me in, so’s we'd kill you together and wash
up fair!” Mrs. Elstree shuddered, but she
laughed nevertheless; she felt when Dick
took so grim a thing jocularly it would
not do for her to make new troubles.
But she was seriously disturbed in her
mind all the same. She was not accustomed 
to Indians, and their ways and
their proximity, combined with the possibilities
62

of such ideas as had been brought
to her notice, made her anxious. It might
be all very well to have a terrible penalty
afterwards exacted by one’s friends; but
scalping was not a pleasant matter to contemplate, 
and the battle between the edge
of a tomahawk and the human skull was
not altogether a fair one.
Esse got on very well with the Indians,
They had the idea that she was somehow
or other under the special protection of
Dick, and she was herself so kind to them,
that to show her their eagerness to serve
came easy. At first they amused her,
and then, when she knew them a little
better, they disgusted her. In fact, she
went with them through somewhat of
those phases with which one comes to
regard a monkey before its place in the
scale of creation is put in true perspective.
Now and again she grew furiously indignant
when there came under her notice some
instance of their habitual and brutal cruelty
63

to their squaws and children, their dogs
and their horses, At first she used to
speak to Dick, and to please her he would
rate and threaten them ; but she soon began
to see that this was not quite fair to the
hunter, as it created a certain sullenness
towards him, which augured badly for
future peace. So she gradually began to
realize that, in spite of their ragged relics
of a higher civilization, they were but little
better than savages, and with the savage
instincts which could not be altered all at
once. Dick, who was, like all hunters, a
close observer of little things, noticed the
change in her bearing, and spoke of it in
his own frank way:
“Guess, Little Missy, you're gettin’ the
hang of the Indian. He ain’t of much
account nohow, and ye can’t bet money on
him more’n on a yaller dog. Though he
ain’t so bad as those think that don’t know
him. There’s times when the cruelty of
that lot of ours makes me so mad, I want
64

to wipe them all out; but I know all the
same that there isn’t one of them, man,
woman, or child, that wouldn’t stand between 
me and death. Ay, or between.
any of you and death either. Guess,
you're about beginnin’ to size up the noble
red man without his frills !”
The member of the party who got on
best with the Indians was Miss Gimp.
Le Maistre they respected and looked up
to on account of his big beard; and for
Mrs. Le Maistre they had the respect and
affection which goes with the enjoyment of
toothsome delicacies. But Miss Gimp
ruled amongst them like a princess. No
matter how she rated them for their imperfect 
costume, or their dirty ways, or
their cruelty, they never made reply except
their grave obeisance; and the point of
her umbrella made, without evoking remonstrance, 
indentations in their bodies. When-
ever they saw her stiff skirts moving along
the sward—for Miss Gimp adhered loyally
65

to the traditions of her youth and wore
hoops—albeit of an undefined pattern — they
would glide up as near as they could, keeping 
furtively in the shelter of the trees.
So long as they were allowed, they would
hang around her, looking like a lot of
spectres who had seen better days. At
first this used to annoy her, but it very
soon became a source of pride, for human
nature very soon becomes accustomed to
the deference of inferiors. Miss Gimp, in
her mind, regarded them as in some sort a
kind of royal cohort, and began to treat
them with added disdain, such as is supposed 
to be the attribute of royalty. They
were perpetually sneaking round the house,
and if they saw her at a window would
wait patiently for hours in the hope of
her coming out. Both Mrs, Elstree and
Esse saw with amusement this perpetual
attention on their part, but never said anything 
to her about it. Esse noticed that
it used to give the most intense amusement
66

to Dick whenever he chanced to see it, and
that he often hurried away with a purple
face; and she, listening, would hear the
forest echoing to his explosive laughter.
One day she followed him and came upon
him sitting upon the trunk of a fallen tree,
slapping his thighs, and with his long hair
tossing about as he shook his head in a
paroxysm of laughter. He did not hear
her approach, and for a few moments she
stood looking at him, at first a little indignant 
that he should be making such a
fool of himself; but then the contagion of
his laughter took her, and she too burst out
in a wild peal. He instantly started to his
feet, all his instincts of protection and aggression 
awake, and for the moment sobered
into a grim seriousness. When, however,
he saw who it was, the lines of his face
relaxed, and he said:
“Wall, an’ it’s you, Little Missy. Durn!
if I hadn’t kem away by myself I’d have
busted—jest busted with laughter. The
67

old lady takes the Indians like she was a
queen, an’ all the while it ain’t her they’re
after at all. There ain’t one of them that
wouldn't take and put a tomahawk through
her skull or skelp her so far as the queenin’
racket is concerned.”
“Then what is it they are after, Dick?”
“Tt’s the parrot! Nothin’ else than that
durned parrot!” and again Dick went off
into fits of laughter. When he recovered
his breath, he went on:
“Did ye notice him lately — the parrot,
I mean — they’ve all been tryin’ to get
near him, and jest now one of them went
up nigh him, an’ as soon as he got near up,
the durned bird says ‘How!’ jest as well
as if he was a Christian or an Indian. The
man was so took back that he was like to
drop. They all thought he was a god
before, but nothin’ in this world would
make them disbelieve it now !”
“ But how does this affect Miss Gimp ?”
“Why, don’t ye see, Little Missy, that
68

she has the charge of him; she’s the sachem,
the medicine-man, the witch, and they want
to make themselves solid with her because
they think she can square him. There
isn’t one of them that likes her; but, all the
same, they’d go a good length to please
old Yam-pi, as they call her.”
“What is Vam-pi? What does it mean?”
said Esse, inquisitively.
“It means, in Shoshonie, ‘Leather Legs,’
or ‘the old woman with boots,’” said Dick,
and he laughed again.
Esse came away from the wood not
altogether pleased with Dick. There
seemed to be an overpowering levity in his
character which did not altogether suit her
idea of him, based originally on his fine
physique. A woman who likes a man wants
to respect him, and as Dick was the only
male in the place, for of course Indians and
servants did not count, she felt that she had
to think of him now and then.
One morning Miss Gimp was in a state
69

of suppressed excitement which at once
arrested Esse’s attention. At breakfast
she could not remain still, but buzzed and
fluttered about everyone and everything
in an unusual way. Mrs. Elstree with
her usual placidity did not notice anything
out of the common, or, if she did, kept it to
herself. Esse had therefore the sweet
interest of a secret, and she carefully noticed
every detail of the companion, and very
shortly came to the conclusion that she had
a secret which she was simply bursting to
tell someone—anyone. With true feminine
perversity she therefore, at once and sternly,
made up her mind that she would not assist
in the unfolding at all. If Gimp wanted to
tell anything she would have to do so
altogether on her own initiative. It would
of course have been quite a different thing
if Gimp had a secret which she didn’t want
to tell; in such case Esse would have had to
make the overtures and do the entire corkscrew 
business herself. Therefore it was that
70

the games of hide-and-seek, run-away-and-follow, 
were so prolonged that morning until
they would have afforded the most exquisite
enjoyment to any third party who had been
in the secret. Esse stayed all the early
forepart of the morning with her mother,
nothing could take her away, lured Miss
Gimp never so wisely; and when she did
go out it was at a time when MissGimp was
absorbed in some household duty and could
not follow her. She went into the wood,
and when Miss Gimp followed and called
after her softly, she did not answer; so hour
after hour Miss Gimp had to bear in her
breast the burden of her untold secret.
After lunch Esse’s heart relented, and she
strolled out to the seat on the rocks so that
Miss Gimp could follow her. She sat down,
and within a few minutes the amanuensis
sat alongside her and had entered on her
theme. Esse noticed that she had put on
a veil, an adornment — or concealment — so
rare with her that it became at once noticeable.
71

Esse sat down and waited. She
had allowed the first step to be taken and
had to be wooed into accepting the next.
Miss Gimp looked up at her under her
eyelids with a very tolerable imitation of
bashfulness, simpered, sighed, looked up
and down several times, turned warily round
to see that there was no one else within
earshot, gave a premonitory cough, and
opened proceedings :
“It is a very strange thing!” said she.
“Indeed ?”
“Yes, my dear; and the worst of it is
that it is so embarrassing. One doesn’t wish
to make anyone unhappy, much less to ruin
their lives!” After a pause, which Esse
filled up with another “Indeed,” Miss Gimp
went on:
“I have been told that young men take
such matters so to heart that they grow wild,
and go out and drink, and do all manner of
dreadful things!” Esse’s curiosity was now
becoming interested ; she had a vague idea
72

that Miss Gimp had some kind of hallucination 
as to a love affair, but she could not
quite make out yet what was its special
direction. She felt herself thinking a
phrase which she had several times heard
Dick use, ‘How many kinds of a durn’d fool
was it that she was makin’ of herself?”
Her monotonous “Indeed” was hardly
adequate to the situation, so she added with
as little tendency towards laughter as she
could manage.
“Poor young man! You must not let
him suffer too much!” Miss Gimp sighed
and wiped a phantom tear from her cheek
as she said in a far-away manner.
“ Oh, poor Dick! Poor dear Dick! I fear
he has much suffering before him! Did you
speak?” she added in a different tone, for
Esse had on the instant been taken with a
sudden and very violent cough which made
her in a short space of time grow almost
purple in the face. The shock was too
much when Miss Gimp apostrophized the
73

man who was the victim of unhappy attachment, 
and in her mind's eye rose the burly
figure of Grizzly Dick, driven crazed for
love, painting red spots all over the town of
Sacramento. The figure changed instantly
to the same man sitting amongst the forest
trees, slapping his thighs and roaring with
laughter as he thought of Miss Gimp and
the parrot, and the relative places which
they held in Indian esteem. Miss Gimp
bridled somewhat, and seemed more than
ever to justify her Indian name; but Esse,
who really liked her, found her risibility
checked by her genuine concern for her,
apologized for the interruption, and asked
her to go on. So, with as many “flirts and
flutters” as Poe’s famous bird of ill omen,
Miss Gimp began her story.
“It has surprised—surprised me very
much, to find little offerings placed outside
my window. Most odd things, my dear —
wild turkeys and young fawns, hare, bear -
meat, and sometimes fruit of an edible kind,
74

potatoes, honey, and such like. I wondered
who could have put them there!” Here she
simpered in a way that would have looked
artificial in a girls’ school on the day when
male relatives are received. Then she
went on with marked inconsequentiality :
“It would be a sin — a perfect sin to drive
to desperation such a fine figure of a man!”
Esse had expected to find her laughter
uncontrollable as the story went on, but
instead she felt something beginning to
overpower her which was much nigher akin
to tears. How could she but feel sorrow
for the poor, dear old thing who-with all
her oddities was as loyal and as true as the
' sunlight. She knew that whatever was the
cause of her error, there was no possibility
of her manifest wishes being carried out.
Then came a doubt. “ How did she herself
know this?” with the consequent answer,
“ Because Dick was already "— the thought
was completed in her mind with an overpowering 
rush of blood to her face, which
75

Miss Gimp must have noticed only that
she was coyly turning away and simpering
all to herself.
It is commonly thought that men and
women become transformed and glorified in
and by great moments. This may be so,
but the common idea of great moments is
not so true to Nature, There are great
moments for all the Children of Adam; but
they are not always great through the force
of external facts. The dramatic moment
in real life does not always come amongst
picturesque and suitable surroundings. It
is the conjuncture of spiritual and mundane
suitabilities which makes the opportunity
of the dramatist; but to others, who are the
puppets of the great dramatic poet Nature,
the moments of transfiguration come as they
came to St. Paul. The Great Light which
turns the thoughts of men inwards, and
reveals to themselves the secret springs of
their own actions, has many moral and
psychical and intellectual manifestations.
76

The pagans whose imagination wrought
into existence the whole theology of
Olympus, had a subtle insight into the
human heart when they showed the familiar
figure of Cupid shooting his sweetly poisoned
arrows at them that slept.
Such a crucial moment was now for
Esse. She had come to that great temple
of the hillside to laugh—to laugh at the
brain-sick, love-sick fancies of an old woman
whose whole being seemed a mockery of
the possibilities of love; and she had
remained to pray, with a bitter pang of
hope and fear. In the whirling of her
thought she got glimpses into her own
soul which made her cheeks burn, even
while half in a fainting mood she felt the
solid earth slipping beneath her feet. Her
mind must have been earnestly occupied,
for she did not hear Miss Gimp'go on with
her story. It was strange to her that after
a pause of mental blankness, during which
she sat still, she felt the roaring in her cars
77

pass away and realized that Miss Gimp was
speaking—speaking with the volubility of
one who has entered on a congenial theme
and is under its sway:
“Of course, my dear, Dick being a
hunter thinks that he should make his — he!
he! — offerings of a suitable kind. It is most
embarrassing, for a girl can’t put a leg of a
deer, or a bear ham, or a wild turkey, into
a jewel case, or lock it up in a drawer, so
that she can take it out when no one is
looking and kiss it. In fact there is no
sense in kissing a ham or a leg of raw meat
at all, and if you lock it up in a drawer it
doesn’t smell very nice, even if it does not
go bad altogether. The matter is now
getting serious. I assure you, my dear, that
my room is beginning to get into a shocking
state. J am positively afraid to open the
lower section of my chest of drawers, for I
put the first of the—the offerings in there;
and there’s a very suspicious odour from it
already. I wish you'd advise me, my dear,
78

what I ought to do!” There was such a
delightful air of seriousness about Miss
Gimp as she made her strange disclosure,
and it seemed so absolutely out of harmony
with the ridiculous matter, that Esse felt
once more an almost overpowering desire
to laugh. She felt that she could not overcome 
it if she remained where she was, so
she started up briskly, and, taking Miss
Gimp by the arm, called out: 
“Come along quick!—We must look
over the jewel casket, and see what can be
done.” Miss Gimp would rather have sat
still and nursed her sentiment, but she was
overborne by Esse’s spirits and energy;
and so hand in hand, like a pair of children,
they raced to the house.
When they went into Miss Gimp’s room
there was no possibility of mistaking the
odour. Even a properly arranged larder is
not always the most pleasant of places, but
a lady's bedroom is in no way adapted for
the storage of dead flesh. Esse for a
79 

moment felt qualmish, and would have
decamped at once only that Miss Gimp had
silently and mysteriously locked the door,
and so she remained, supported solely by
the humour of the situation. Miss Gimp
walked on tip-toe over to the chest of
drawers and opened the top drawer,
“Here is the last,” she said as she lovingly
surveyed a fine wild turkey which was
huddled into the drawer, wings and neck
and tail twisted about ruthlessly. She put
in her hand and began to stroke its feathers,
whilst she sighed pensively. The idea of a
hunter's bride was strongly fixed in her
mind, and with it a tenderness towards all
belonging to his craft. Esse now wanted
to see the job over so she asked :
“ And where is the first?” Miss Gimp
pulled out the lowest drawer of all and
disclosed to Esse’s gaze a horrible looking
leg of deer meat all blue, damp and sodden ;
and which had been rudely hacked from the
carcase. The look and the smell almost
80

turned Esse faint, and with a sudden jerk
she shut up the drawer. ‘What an awful
thing to send you!” was all she could say.
Miss Gimp was pathetically apologetic in
her manner as she said :
“Well, it is an odd way of showing
affection. If it had been a nice gold
specimen now, or one of those opals in the
matrix, like the one that was presented to
your mother in Mexico, or a slab of onyx,
one would understand it better. But the
dear man has his own ways I suppose!
He is a fine figure of a man, isn’t he?”
This she said in a burst of something like
rapture. Esse tried to cut this short — the
new light still shone round her enough to
make it seem unfair to let the other woman
show her heart, more especially when her
hopes were so baseless; so she turned the
conversation to what was to be done with
the offerings. Miss Gimp was beginning to
be seriously alarmed about being found out,
on one side as hoarding the provisions in
81

such a ridiculous way, and on the other of
being laughed at if she broached the subject
at all; so she was glad to embrace Esse’s
suggestion that they should during the
darkness of the evening take out the gifts
and bury them.
This fell deed was achieved before they
went to bed that night, and Miss Gimp
slept peacefully, with the consciousness of a
weight taken off her mind.
The next morning Esse came across
Dick, who was for once in a way in a
tearing rage. She asked him the cause, and
he told her :
“It’s that durned crowd—dirty, thievin’
scoundrels ; an’ J believe that Heap Hungry
is at the bottom of it. I’d make some of
them own up, but that it don’t suit me to
quarrel with them just now. I'll lay for
them some night an’ I’ll put a hole through
some of them.”
“ What have they been stealing ?”
“Not much -— nothin’ of any value, but
82

it’s the beginnin’, and I mean to stop it
right here. An Indian is real pizon when
he gets off the square, and this may be only
one in the lot; but it’s a beginnin’, and I
won’t stand it!” Esse began to have an
understanding, so she asked again :
“ What did they steal, Dick ?”
“Oh, only some meat and such like. A
week ago I had a buck hangin’ up, an’ in
the night the durned thieves came and
hacked a leg off it; last night it was a
turkey. By gum, Little Missy, what air you
laughin’ at now?” for Esse had gone off in
peals of laughter after his own manner. At
first he was annoyed, but in a few seconds
the anger of his face disappeared ; then his
features relaxed into a grin and the pent up
whirlwind burst, and Esse’s laughter was
drowned in the volume of his stentorian
tones. When Esse recovered her breath
she told him what she hdd found out,
and as Dick’s laughter broke out afresh at
every step of the doing, of Heap Hungry’s
83

stealing the meat and placing it in Miss
Gimp’s window as an offering to the parrot,
of her taking it to herself and as a love gift
from Dick, and of the mysterious burying.
Then she suggested that to complete the
circle Dick should come each night and dig
up the offering and use it either for himself
or for Mrs, Elstree’s household. The
humour of the idea took hold of Dick, and
his imagination was so manifestly touched
that Esse got a little frightened lest he
should in some way betray the secret. She
was only made easy when he solemnly
swore not to betray the secret in any way.
And so this night Dick went to his cabin
shaking with laughter; and Esse put her
head on her pillow filled with a secret but
fearful exultation that Dick and she shared
a secret between them.
84

IV.
Esse’s first quarrel with Dick arose from
wounded vanity. Remotely the feeling
may have been on his side, but the immediate 
cause was on her own part. When
the secret had been shared for some time,
she began to take Dick to task in a purely
feminine way. She wanted his hands to
be always clean, and his nails to be properly
regulated. Dick was something of a dandy
in his way, but in the mountains vanity
prefers more picturesque forms than the
manifestations of soap and water. He was
not by any means a dirty man; but more
than the mere absence of dirt is: demanded
by the exigence of feminine propinquity,
and Esse, greatly daring, took him to task.
He received her monitions well enough at
the time, but later on developed a certain
85

huffiness which told her that his self-love
had been wounded. Anxious to set matters
right, she took an early opportunity of saying 
to him:
“Dick, you know you and I should help
one another. You are big and strong, and
mother says that the care you have taken
of me, and the sense of security which your
presence gives has made a new girl of me.
I want to see you like other men — no, no!
don’t mean like them, with all their meanness
and selfishness, but in not being ridiculous
or not seeming at your best. Down in the
cities men have rules among themselves as
to how they should dress and what they
should do; and I wouldn't like any of them
to misjudge you, if you should be there, or
they here. You're not offended with me,
are you, Dick?” He had been sitting with
his knees apart and his face downcast, but
there was something in her voice which made
him look up. His great blue eyes looked
into her great brown ones, and the whole
86

quarrel was made up in one word as he
held out his great brown hand and said :
“Shake!” Esse took the pleasant
punishment of his pump-handle shake
without a wince, and when Dick had
dropped her hand as suddenly as he had
grasped it she felt in a less dictatorial
mood towards him than she had ever experienced. 
With a certain new shyness
she said :
“And I want you, Dick, to tell me of
anything you notice that isn’t quite right in
me---not quite as you'd have it in a girl
that you respected. You know, Dick, we
all want help to do the best that we are
capable of!” she went on in a voice that
somehow seemed to herself not to ring
true, though Dick did not seem to notice
it. He fidgetted his hands about awkwardly 
and blushed, actually blushed like a
school-girl—that is, as a school-girl is
supposed to blush according to the books.
Then he coughed prefatorily: this sent a
87

pang through Esse’s heart, or whatever
portion of her anatomy vanity resides in.
Did a woman ever yet not feel a pang
when a man whom she liked discovered
the smallest fault? She could have beaten
herself for the falsity of her tone as she
said, with seeming impulsiveness :
“Go on, Dick! Don’t be afraid! I'll
tell you if you’re right.” So Dick began:
“Wall, Little Missy, as you wish me to
tell you, there is a matter—I don’t know as
how I oughter mention it; or I don’t quite
know how to say it right. But it hasn’t
been my own noticin’ entirely. Them
Shoshonies are mighty cute in noticin’, an’
they havea name for you which tells it; or
rather they had, till I promised to knock
the stuffin’ out of any of them that would
use it again.”
“What was it?” asked Esse in curiosity,
though her face was suffused with an indignant 
blush. But Dick kept an artful
silence on the point.
88

“Well, Little Missy, I think I’d better
explain to you first. Why do you keep
that. nose-rag of yours always over your
face the way you do? Guess, it looks
mighty odd to folks!” Esse’s blush turned
a bright scarlet ; she had a habit which had
adhered to her from childhood up, just as
some children maintain the habit of sucking
the thumb, and concerning which she had —
often been spoken to and remonstrated
with, She would twirl her handkerchief
round her forefinger and thumb, and then
place these fingers, parted widely, across
her nose and mouth and sit reading
hour after hour in this attitude. Even
when she was not reading she would unconsciously 
assume the same position. She
could not but be conscious that the habit
was an odd one even if her mother and
Miss Gimp had not kept her eternally
informed of it, and it was simply gall and
wormwood to her to have Dick notice the
matter and join in the ranks of her tormentors
89

For a few moments she remained
silent in sheer bewilderment as to what she
should say, and then the only thing that
was possible under the circumstances was
spoken :
“Thank you! Dick, it is a bad habit I
know, and mother and Gimp are always
hammering me about it. I suppose I got
into a habit as a child, and it has stuck to
me. But Vil try and get rid of it! indeed
I will” There were tears of mortified
vanity in her eyes, which recognizing, Dick
held out a red hand and gave his comfort in
a homeopathic dose :
“Shake!” Then Esse grew coy and
said :
“Not till you tell me what the Indians
call me.” Dick looked for a moment
embarrassed, and then his laugh rang out.
“Ha! ha! ha! Well, Little Missy, I'll tell
you—they call you Pahoo-mounon-he-ka.”
“And what does that mean?” as she
spoke Esse tried to keep down her flaming
90

indignation. The very fact of her not
knowing what the word or phrase meant
intensified her feeling. Omne ignotum pro
magnifico. Dick answered ;
“It means, ‘Nose-ghost’; so you see
that even the Shoshonies, that haven’t had a
- nose-rag among them since Adam, noticed
that you don’t use yours correctly.”
“I presume that you mean a pocket-handkerchief 
by—by that—that vulgar
phrase,” said Esse tartly.
“That's so. But look here, Little Missy,
since we're on the trail, and we mean to
run down the game this time — and since
you kick—oh, yes, you do! Don’t I see it
in every corner of your face! A man don't
learn woodcraft without gettin’ to notice
little things like that! Let us wash up
clean right here. Why do you always
carry the nose-rag—excuse, me little Missy,
the pocket-handkerchief—rolled up in a
ball when you're not making a tent of it
over your nose ?”
91

“I don’t do anything of the kind!” said
Esse indignantly, and again the tears of
mortified vanity rose in her eyes. Dick
laughed in a way that seemed more insulting 
and aggressive than ever as he slapped
his thigh in the way that aggravated Esse
more than anything else.
“Wall, bust me if that doesn’t take the
cake! Here is you denyin’ that; an’ all the
time you're a-holdin’ your nose-rag screwed
up just the same as ever!” Esse looked at
her hand, and, seeing the handkerchief just
as he had said, flung it on the ground as
though it had been something noxious.
Then, turning her back, she ran out of the
glade, and went home.
An hour later she went back to the glade
to get the handkerchief, but she could not
find it; it had gone. From this little fact
she felt that Miss Gimp could have woven.
a romance; and somehow it did not seem to
her that it would have been quite ridiculous
on the part of Miss Gimp.
92

Two days afterwards, Dick, in the midst
of a conversation, suddenly stopped and
handed her the handkerchief, neatly washed
out and folded:
“ This belongs to you, Little Missy. You
dropped it in the wood the other night when
you ran away.” Esse took it with a simple
“thank you,” but when she got home, she
put it in the locked drawer where she kept
her valuables of all sorts,
The constant habit of trying to conquer
her old trick when Dick was present
seemed in some way to make a subtle kind
of barrier between them. But it was in
truth only a subtle barrier, and one that
thought could overleap at will, The very
existence of such a restraint raised the
rough man in the girl’s eyes to a more
important position, and blinded her to a
thousand little roughnesses and coarsenesses 
which would have hourly offended
her more cultured susceptibilities. This
very lack of refinement on’ Dick’s part
93

caused Esse many unhappy moments, for
he seemed to fail to see that she was trying
her best to rid herself of the ridiculous
habit, and would often notice failures to
which a more delicately minded person
would have been wilfully blind. Thus,
Esse soon grew to abandon the habit of
covering her mouth and nose, but she still
instinctively and unconsciously clung to
the habit of rolling her handkerchief, and
keeping it hidden in the hollow of her
hand. But habits, be they never so trivial
or ridiculous, have a hideous vitality of
their own, and Esse soon found to her cost,
that this unutterably trivial habit, which
both the Indians and the trapper had
noticed, had a tenacity denied to worthier
things. She was often wounded to the
quick when Dick, in his boisterous way
would notice her resumption of her failing;
but all the time this little trial was forming
her character and developing that consciousness 
of effort which marks the border line
94

between girl and woman. Once she was
goaded into a retort—but such a retort as
she had never dreamed of — when Dick
had slapped his thigh, and with a Titanic
peal of laughter remarked :
“ Wall, Little Missy, the Ghost is kep’ to
home in the shanty to-day, but she’s sent
the wean on the trail!” she answered,
with a certain soft appealing in her voice:
“You needn’t be too hard on me, Dick.
I am doing my best; but | can’t be quite
perfect all at once.” She had never in all
"her life been so sweetly womanly as at the
moment, and even whilst she spoke she
could not but feel that some change had
taken place in her own nature. Dick
seemed to realize this too, for off came his
cap in a moment in apology, and he said
with, for him, gravity :
“Your pardon, Little Missy. Why, I
wouldn’t pain you for all the world!” Esse
smiled, and held out her hand, which was
by this time nearly as brown -as his own,
95

and said, in exact imitation of his style,
“Shake!” And so that breeze passed on
its way and left the air clearer behind it.
In these days Miss Gimp was nursing a
gentle melancholy, which was daily fostered
on game, honey, and raw meat, which took
their usual course on their allotted circle
from Dick’s larder to Miss Gimp’s window-sill, 
thence, via her wardrobe, to the place
of burial, and so back to the larder
again. Heap Hungry was more than ever
assiduous in his attentions to the parrot,
and was maturing schemes of his own. Esse
had now taken up her sketching, and having
exhausted all the picturesque possibilities
of the plateau, had begun to go further
afoot in search of material to suit her fancy.
Tired of the endless expanse, she now
sought inclosed dells amidst the woods.
She used to go about alone now, for her
health had been completely restored by the
bracing air, and the chemical qualities of
the water, as the doctors had foretold.
96

She sometimes took the dog with her, but
not always; for the freedom of the mountain 
had somewhat demoralized it, and
it took to hunting in miniature on its
own account, instead of devoting itself
solely to the wishes of its mistress. At
first Miss Gimp used to accompany her,
but Esse got so unutterably tired of her
perpetual chattering, that by-and-by she
began to make excuses to leave her at
home. When she found that these, being
naturally limited, began to be exhausted,
she kept her away by making her own
sketching tours to distant places. Miss
Gimp knew when she was beaten in this
respect, and after a time made no effort to
accompany her. Esse had by this time,
under Dick’s guidance, learned to shoot
with a heavy revolver, which he insisted
that she should always carry with her when
out of sight of the house.
“’Tain’t, Little Missy, that I’m afeard of
any special harm; because if I’m put to it
97

I can’t point out any as is likely to come.
But in the forest everythin’ or anythin’ may
be harmful, and you can’t be wrong any-
how in bein’ heeled proper! Some day
or other you'll find that very derringer of
yourn the best friend you ever set eyes on.
But even if ye don’t, wall! then the exercise 
of carryin’ it won’t do your muscles
no harm!” Mrs. Elstree did not at first
like the idea of Esse carrying firearms, but
when she saw that she soon acquired a
certain dexterity in their use she solaced
herself with the thought that at any rate
they meant protection.
One day Esse, straying further than
usual down the steep side of the mountain,
came to a spot which excited all her artistic
admiration. The hot sun beat into a dell
so well watered that even in the great heat
the grass was as green as emerald, and
there was about everything a semi-tropical
luxuriance. There was a fallen tree, which
served for a seat, and here, having unstrapped
98

and mounted her portable easel,
she began to make her sketch. There
was a drowsy hum about the place, for
these were regions of honey bees, and in
the delightful solitude her thoughts took
their most pleasant way, their central point
being none other than the picturesque
figure of Grizzly Dick. For two days she
had not seen him, for he had gone out
on a hunting expedition and had not yet
returned. By-and-by the sweet drowsiness
of the place overcame her; her hands and
eyes relaxed from the intentness of their
work, and with a gentle little sigh she slid
from the log, and, half reclining against it,
slept among the soft grass.
After a while she started, broad awake
with that conviction upon her of some new
presence, which shows that some of the
senses at least guard us even during sleep.
She realized that there was some physical
stir going on around her, for the log against
which she leaned was being shaken, and
99

the sounds, as it was touched, were like
sawing and hammering together. Her
senses, only half aroused, had still something 
of the imaginative power of sleep;
and even whilst she felt and listened there
grew over her some strange feeling of
uncanniness. Of one thing she was certain, 
that her surroundings were not those
she was accustomed to, and all awake
in a moment her heart began to beat
strangely.
“As one who on a lonesome road doth walk with fear
and dread,
and having once turned round he turns no more his
head,
Because he knows some frightful fiend doth close
behind him tread.”
Esse felt herself gasping out the lines as,
with instinctive caution, she turned her
head round to see what was causing the
disturbance.
The sight which met her eyes might
well have appalled the bravest. A great
100

grizzly she-bear was tearing a honeycomb
from the end of the log, whilst two tiny
cubs sat on their haunches by her side.
Esse’s brain began to throb. She could
not think all at once, but her instinct was
to remain still, and she obeyed it. Then
she began to remember that to feign death
is an artifice of the hunter, and she feared
lest the bear should turn round, and, seeing
her eyes open, would discover her secret,
so she shut them close and waited.
But the suspense was awful. Her temples
began to throb, and she felt an almost
irresistible desire to scream out. Each
instant the monster seemed to be coming
closer, closer, till its great paw was stretched
to tear her heart out, as she had seen it
rend the fallen tree to take out the honeycomb. 
In her fancy she saw the great
shaggy head thrust forward, till the big
white teeth were close to her, and the
enormous mouth was opened to seize her.
She could feel the hot breath falling over
101

her, and could even smell the sweet scent
of the honeycomb which the bear had
been eating..... She could bear the suspense 
no longer, and opened her eyes.
And then a desire to laugh almost as irresistible 
as that to scream came to her, and
instinctively she crammed her pocket-handkerchief 
into her mouth. The bear was
sitting down on her haunches, sucking the
honey from her paws, and the two cubs
were simply her miniatures in appearance
and attitude.
But her mirth was short-lived, for as she
looked she saw the bear turn her head
suddenly to the opposite side of the thicket
and give a low warning growl, which had
the effect of drawing the cubs to her side
as though they had been attached with
springs which had suddenly been released.
Between the bear and the edge of the
thicket was a low clump of bushes, and to
look beyond this she reversed herself on
her hind paws, and with a sort of waddle
102

moved to the far side of it. Esse looked
on fascinated. As she looked she saw
Dick’s head rise above the edge of the
thicket, and the muzzle of his rifle brought
down to cover the bear. He had not seen
her, for the clump of bushes and the log
hid her easel and herself from him, and his
eyes had been so intently fixed on the bear
that he had seen nothing else. Esse was
afraid to move even an eyelid, lest she
should spoil his aim, and waited, waited,
with her heart throbbing. Dick meant to
take no chances, but just as he was about
to fire a slight puff of wind turned the
leaves of the sketch-book, which lay on
top of the log beside where Esse had been
sitting. This was just enough to spoil
his aim; the rifle cracked, and seemingly
at the very instant the bear, with a wild
snarl, threw herself forward at Dick.
Esse started to her feet; but the happenings 
were quicker than her movements.
Seeing the bear rushing at him, Dick
103

shifted his rifle to his left hand, and grasping 
his bowie knife with his right, threw it
open with that dexterous jerk which those
who use the weapon understand. The
bear struck at him, but only hit the rifle,
which, driven forward, took Dick on the
leg, knocking him off his balance. Esse
screamed, but Dick recovered in an instant,
and, as the other great paw was raised to
strike, drove the knife straight into the
beast’s heart. But the grizzly bear is a
creature of extraordinary vitality, and death
seems to reach it but slowly. The up-
lifted paw fell, and catching him on the
thigh, broke it, with the sound of a snapping 
branch, and threw him down as though
he had been struck with a: hammer, whilst
the forward rush of the great beast took its
dead body onward.
It seemed to Esse that all at once Dick
lay on the ground, maimed and bleeding,
with the great bulk of the dead grizzly
pinning him down.
104

She rushed over to him, and, although
the sight of the blood unnerved her for a
moment, bent over to help him. Dick lay
on his side, with the back of the bear
towards his head, and she could see by the
way that one of his legs — which stuck out
from under the carcase — was twisted, that
it must be broken. She seized hold of the
bear's leg to try to drag it off, but as she
tugged at it unavailingly Dick groaned and
spoke to her:

“ Hold hard, Little Missy! The varmint
has broke my leg, an’ is lyin’ on it; but
don’t bother about it yet a minute. We'll
have some work to do first! The old
gentleman was the one I was followin’, an’
he ain’t fur off. When he sees that I’ve
sliced up his missis he’ll come in on the
tear, and we've got to look out. Try if
you can find my rifle. The b’ar knocked
it out of my hand with her first come on,
and I fear it’s busted!” Esse looked and
found the rifle; but it was all destroyed,
105

the stock beaten off, and the barrel bent.
Dick groaned.
“Look here, Little Missy, you can’t do
no good here. You trot off home, and tell
Le Maistre to get some of the Indians to
come along here with a blanket and a pole.
Let them bring their weppins, for if the old
gentleman don’t get me before they come,
we'll get him, sure.”
“Go, and leave you alone!” said Esse
indignantly, “and you wounded and tied
down like that? Not me! What do you
take me for?”
“By gum! J take you for a plucky little
girl, anyhow; an’ I shan’t never forget it!
But what can you do? What can I do,
with my weppins gone—for this young lady
has got my knife in her, an’ is lyin’ on it!
I can’t stir—hold on! What’s that?” He
raised his hand warningly, and then said in
an agonized whisper : ,
“ For God A’mighty’s sake, Little Missy,
clear out that way!” and he pointed to one
106

side of the clearing ; “and if ever ye clumb
a tree in your life, try todo so now! There’s
the male b’ar on the track. Quick! quick!
here he comes!” At that instant there
was a fierce growling, the underbush
crackled as if violently forced aside, and an
enormous grizzly bear plunged into the
glade. A grizzly bear is at all times a
sight to inspire terror, but when inflamed
to do battle he is more than ever appalling.
Esse stood a moment paralyzed, till she
heard Dick’s quick shout to her :
“Get out your gun, Little Missy—quick !
It’s the only chance now!” Esse looked
helplessly to where her revolver was hung
on the cross arm of her easel; but it was
as close to the bear as it was to her, and
she knew that before she could reach it the
fierce animal, which was even now rearing
on its hind legs to plunge, would be down
upon her. He had smelled the blood, and
had seen the body of his mate, and was full
of fury. In her helplessness she had been
107

unconsciously twisting her pocket-handkerchief 
into a ball in her usual habit, and as
the bear dashed forward, she instinctively
threw it at him, throwing it in that high,
helpless, over-arm fashion which is woman’s
method. The tiny ball struck him between
the eyes, and opening out with the impact,
just as a slight puff of wind swept through
the glade, for an instant covered his face.
He stopped and put up a great paw to tear
it down, and as he did so, Esse heard a
chuckle from Dick across the glade. This,
together with the hiding of the baleful
eyes, which seemed to have in some way
fascinated her, recalled her to herself; to
her dreadful position and Dick’s; to the
necessity for instant action, With a bound
she jumped to the easel and seized her
revolver, and as the bear, who had now
cleared his eyes, hurled his vast body towards 
her, she fired once, twice, at random,
with only a vague intent of aiming at him,
but without marking any special spot. The
108

good fortune which now and again waits
on novices seemed to have guided her aim,
for one of the baleful eyes seemed on the
instant to become obliterated, and then to
spout out blood. The grizzly quivered, and,
whirling his great paws like the flying sails
of a windmill, fell over towards her in a
heap. The sharp claws of one of the fore-
paws, just grazing her flesh, tore through
her dress, and rent it in strips, almost tearing 
it from her body.
For an instant she gazed at the fallen
monster in a sort of stupefaction. From
this she was aroused by a wild laugh
from Dick; and as she turned to him
she saw him slapping the hind quarters
of the great carcase of the she-bear as
he used to slap his thigh, and heard him
say:
“Durn my cats, if Little Missy hain’t
killed the biggest grizzly on the Pacific
Slope with her nose-rag !”
As she looked however, his voice faltered ;
109

and as she ran towards him she saw his
face grow deadly pale, as flesh does under
ether spray, and he sank back seemingly
as dead as the mighty brute that lay over
him.
110

V.
Essz rushed wildly over to Dick, and,
kneeling down by him, raised his head and
laid it on her knee. As she did so she
became aware for the first time of the
ravages which the bear had made with her
clothing, and a hot blush swept over her.
In the intensity of her shame it did not
trouble her to see that the bear’s claws had
in that last death-stroke actually cut her
flesh, and that her stocking—the remnant
of it—was running with blood. She looked
despairingly round for a moment in the
vague hope of help, but seeing that there
was none she braced herself for the superlative 
efforts which had now to be made.
Her reason and even her emotion responded
to the call, and she set about her work with
a business-like precision, First she felt
111

Dick’s heart, and distinguishing its beat,
though very faint, knew that he still lived.
This made her efforts of feverish intensity,
and she worked with an unconscious power
and purpose which those who knew her
would never have suspected.
First she threw the remnants of her torn
dress around her and pinned them together ;
this was just enough to protect her modesty
and did not impede her efforts. Then she
set herself to draw the body of the great
she-bear from Dick’s wounded leg. She
knew that it must be taken away in the
direction of head to feet so as not to lacerate
the flesh with the broken bones or to rub
the pieces together. If she could but
succeed in removing either the body from
him, or him from underneath the body,
without further injury to the broken leg,
all might be well—at least the smallest
amount of harm would be done. So she
set herself to examine the situation, and as
her eye lit on the bent barrel of the rifle
112

she straightway conceived a plan. She
buried one end of it in the ground, close
to Dick's chest, leaving the other sloping
up the brute’s great side—this was made
with a rough calculation of the weight, so
that the carcase could not topple sideways.
Then she got a strong branch and, using
it as a lever, began to try to lift the bear
little by little. At first she could not stir
the carcase, but by getting each time the
lever further under she felt at last that it
moved. Then, bending her knees, she put
the branch on her shoulder, and, using all
her strength, pushed upwards. The weight
rose, and the gun-barrel, slipping down the
side, acted asa strut and prevented it falling 
back. With joy Esse looking down
saw that Dick’s legs were free; running to
his head she took him from behind under
the armpits and dragged him safely away.
As it was, there had not been a moment to
lose, for the weight of the bear was slowly
sinking the gun-barrel into the soft ground
113

and a few seconds later the carcase sank
back to its old place. But Dick was free.
Then she ran and filled her cup with water
from the little rill that murmured over the
rock in the glade, and raising Dick’s head
began to try to restore him to consciousness.
It was but the consequence of her woman-
hood that in the midst of her ministrations
she stooped and kissed the brow, pale
under its nut-brown skin, and never thought
of blushing as she did so. The change of
posture, and the relief from the horrible
pressure on his wounded leg, seemed to
aid in restoring him to consciousness, and
after a minute or two of her bathing his
temples, and trying to force a few drops of
water into his mouth, he opened his eyes in
a dull, dazed way and looked inquiringly
round him. The first manifestation of instinct 
was that of the hunter; that of the
man came later. He said in a quick, eager
voice:
“The b’ar! Is he dead?” but catching
114

sight of Esse’s face a gleam of fun lit up
his own as he said: “Oh, I remember ;
you killed him with ”—here he seemed to
realize that Esse had not come off scot free
in the encounter, for in a horrified way he
said, raising himself on one elbow, whilst he
pointed with the other hand :
“Why, Little Missy, you're wounded.
Taint very bad, I hope!”
“No! no, Dick—it’s nothing. He only
tore my dress!”
“Sol see. The brute! couldn’t he let
you alone, anyhow!” Esse burst out laughing. 
She had been under such a horrible
strain of anxiety and effort that some reaction 
must come. Dick’s remark, and,
moreover, the rueful, angry tone of it,
afforded the occasion. There was to her
something exquisitely humorous in the
idea that they too who had just escaped
death—if indeed they had escaped, for
their troubles were only beginning—should
be only troubled about a torn dress. Dick
115

joined in the laugh, but it was rather through
his instinct than from any merriness of
heart, for presently his laughter suddenly
ceased, and with a groan he fell back. He
had not fainted as Esse found when she
had flown to his side; it was simply that
the pain had overcome him, and after giving
him some whiskey from his flask he was
somewhat restored. But even in his half
swooning state he had been thinking, for
he now said:
“Wall, Little Missy, guess ye’ll have to
tramp off by yourself, and send down that
help to bring me home. You jest pull my
knife outer that b’ar an’ find my gun for
me if it’s lyin’ anywheres round, an’ put a
cup of water by me. Then you jest run
off home afore the dark comes on.”
“Tm not going to do anything of the
kind!—I’m not going to leave you here
alone!”
“Then what in thunder air ye goin’ to
do? Air you an’ me to stick here and have
116

a picnic as long as the b’ar meat holds out ?
No! Little Missy; ye’ll hev to gohome, an’
soon, or that prospectin’ party will have to
bring on a bran new coffin for this durned
leg of mine!” He winced and almost
writhed with pain. In the meantime Esse’s
mind was made up and she had commenced
action. Pulling from the heart of the
grizzly Dick’s bowie knife, though it made
her shudder to touch the bloody hilt, she
quickly cut several straight sticks and
trimmed them roughly. These she placed
beside Dick and quietly began to tear the
remnant of her dress, the part which she
was not wearing, into long strips ; she then
filled her cup with water and dipped the
bandages in it. Dick looked on with
silent admiration, for even in the midst of
his pain he could admire her swift dexterity ;
and with a practical man’s instinct, seeing
that she was busy with her work, did not
distract her, but waited with what patience
he could summon. When Esse commenced
117

her efforts to splint the wounded leg Dick
helped her, not only with directions, but by
shutting his teeth hard and enduring without 
a groan even her most ignorant efforts.
At last the job was done, and Dick spoke
again:
“My dear Little Missy, I’m world-wide
obliged to ye. Ye saved my life from
that old grizzly, and ye've doctored me fine!
Now, run off home, an’ I’ll be all safe here
till ye return.”
“I'm not going to leave you, Dick!” she
said decisively. “I’m going to carry you
home myself.” Dick laughed feebly, but
this time it wounded the girl to the quick ;
she blushed up hotly, but cooled at once
into a paleness, and her answer came with
sudden tears into her eyes :
“You wouldn’t leave me, Dick, if it was
I who was hurt — would you, now?”
“Wall, I should smile!” said Dick.
“ Then why should I leave you?” Dick
scratched his head ; logic and reason failed
118

him as they have failed many a man
when arraying them against the strength of
a woman’s resolve. Besides, Esse had a
very forcible argument on her side ; in his
helpless condition it was utterly impossible
that he should oppose any of her wishes.
Accordingly, when Esse bent over to lift
him, he gave the best aid in his power
by throwing his strong arms round her
shoulders, and so placing his weight that
she could most easily carry him.
And, strange to say, she did carry him
all the way home. It is true that the
struggle seemed an endless one, and that
over and over again she felt that she could
have lain down and died of sheer fatigue.
But it was for life and death, and to men
and women who have true grit great needs
give great endeavour. They bring out all
that is royal in their natures, from physical
strength to highest nerve and psychic
power, so that such strength as Nature has
manifested to them can be used to the full.
119

Dick suffered a simple martyrdom ; for the
constant struggle of the weary girl, and her
want of usage in such effort, seemed to
thrill through the very marrow of his bones,
and made the broken leg a veritable torture.
But he was a generous and chivalrous soul,
and never once in all the long weary hours
that followed their outset for home did he
utter a groan. Even when, every now and
again, the pain overmastered him to such
a degree that he swooned, he did not make
any sign, but took his swoon like a gentleman, 
and sank into it, and awoke from it,
without a sign to add to the torture, both
mental and physical, which the poor devoted
girl, who was struggling on his behalf,
endured. Over and over and over again
had Esse to set down her burden and rest,
her heart panting wildly, and her knees
trembling so sorely that she felt that
she would be unable even to raise her
precious burden again. But each time
her spirit rose to the new endeavour, and
120

she attacked the task before her with a
fresh energy which surprised herself as
much as it did Dick, who helped her loyally
to the very best of his power. His heart
seemed never to flag or falter, and at times,
whilst she sat beside him panting and in
almost utter collapse, his ready laugh would
ring out to cheer her. She was not even
conscious of his swooning, for each time she
spoke to him her voice seemed to recall
him to waking sense, and he resumed the
thread of his own endeavour to cheer her
up.
The sun had long set, and the forest
paths were dim—like cathedral aisles in the
night, when the light through great windows 
just steals in to show the gloom as an
existing thing — when they began to emerge
from the depths of the wood and to enter
on the steep rise that led to the plateau.
Here the moon rose, sailing high in the
heavens, and its cheering light gave Esse,
now tired almost to unconsciousness, a new
121

lease of strength. With feverish energy
she toiled up the steep incline, spurred on
by something of the same feeling which
quickens the pace of a returning horse, or
cheers a spent swimmer who hears the
dash of waves on a welcome shore. At
the top her arms relaxed, and Dick, now
quite unconscious, sank to the ground; and
for a little while she lay beside him almost
as unconscious as he was.
Suddenly she seemed to wake to the
fact that Dick was deathly still, and, forgetting 
for the moment her own awful
tiredness, she sprang to her feet, and,
putting her hands to her mouth, sent out a
shout for help which rang across the plateau
and reached the anxious household, which
awaited her with vague apprehension, shared
by all, but which none dared to utter.
With answering shouts they all ran out,
some bearing lanterns, and came to where
she stood beside Dick’s body. Her mother
screamed when she saw her, for she was
122

indeed but a sorry sight. The struggle,
and the constant forcing a way through
undergrowth, had tumbled her hair and
thrown it, wild and dishevelled, over her
shoulders, and the dust of the forest had
grimed her damp face, which also was
smeared with blood. The hours of strong
effort had kept her own wounds and Dick's
open, and from top to toe the white dress
in which she had started out—all that was
left of it -- was smeared, if not drenched,
with blood. The flashing lanterns threw
into harsh relief the red stains which the
falling moonlight had softened, and though
the wild picturesqueness of her figure
seemed to heighten the effect of her manifest
vitality, it could not comfort the heart of
her mother, who saw in every item of it
danger and pain, and all sorts of unknown
possibilities of horror. Recognizing the
look in her mother’s face, Esse said quickly:
“I am all right, mother. It was the
bears, but they are both dead. Look to
123

Dick! he is badly wounded, and I had to
carry him home!” and even as she spoke
she reeled and would have fallen, only that
the strong arms of her old nurse held her
up. By this time Le Maistre was kneeling
by Dick. Presently he turned round and
said :
“He is not dead! I can feel his heart
beat! Run for some Indians to carry him
to the house!” And without a word, off
started Miss Gimp—who up to now had
stood wringing her hands—glad of an
opportunity to be of some service. Mrs. Le
Maistre murmured to Mrs. Elstree :
“Some Indians to carry him, and the
dear child carried him all by her poor self
up the mountain!”
The Indians were on the spot in a very
few minutes, but by this time Dick had
recovered his senses, under the stimulant
of a little whiskey, and was telling in his
own way of the accident and his rescue,
At first Esse had tried to put in a word of
124

protest when his praise seemed excessive,
but she was by far too exhausted to argue,
and Dick’s words seemed to have a far-
away, pleasing music of their own as he
went on:
“I followed the b’ar an’ missed him, but
see his mate eatin’ honey. As I seen her,
an’ fired, I see Little Missy sittin’ beside
the log, an’ that put out my aim, an’ the
old lady came jumpin’ for me before I
could draw a bead onher. She hit out, and
crumpled up my shootin’-iron quicker nor
I could see; so I had just time to whip out
my bowie, and drive at her before she came
at me, an’ busted my leg into matches, an’
tumbled over me with my knife in her
heart, pinning me down everlastingly.
Then while Little Missy was tryin’ to raise
me up the old-man b’ar came whirlin’
along; but Little Missy went boldly up to
him, and threw her nose-rag in his eye, and
while he was clawin’ it off, she up with her
derringer, and gave it him in the face,
125

He’d just got near enough to rip her tucks
out, and scratch her a bit before he went
under. Then Little Missy she tackled me
like a little hero, as she is, an’ dragged the
b’ar off my sore leg, an’ took an’ splinted
me up and carried me here like I was a
rabbit. Blest, but she’s the all-firedest,
bravest, kindest, staunchest comrade from
the Rockies to the sea! She wouldn't leave
me, no, sir! but took me up here all by her
little self; an’ ’d have died any way, only
for her, half-a-dozen different ways — God
bless her!” then he said in a whisper to Le
Maistre :
“Take me home, quick, old man! Pm
racked with pain, and nigh dead, and its
torture keepin’ it up afore the women folks.
Tl be better when I get to my cabin!”
Mrs. Elstree, who was just bending over,
heard the last word, and said:
"You'll go to no cabin, but to my house,
and be nursed. I'd like to know what
Esse would have done if you hadn't killed
126

the bear; and, whether or no, I wouldn’t
let you go anywhere else. So that ends it!”
“All right, all right; thank ye much!”
said Dick resignedly. “Ye'll forgive me
marm, for my manners, but I ain’t pannin’
out much in that way just now, owin’ to
contrairey circumstances!” And so the
Indians took him up, and carried him to
the house, previous to their going off to the
glade, by his emphatic instructions, to get
the skins and claws of the two grizzlies,
and to bring back the cubs.
For the next few days Esse was obliged
to keep her bed, so that she did not know,
and was barely in a condition to know,
exactly how Dick progressed. The terrible
strain, both mental and physical, which she
had undergone, brought on a sort of fever;
but good nursing, and a little antipyrine,
finally ousted the fever, and she was allowed
to get up. She had of course heard in the
interim of Dick’s condition, and was anxious
to be allowed to assist in the nursing.
127

When she was seated in the balcony, and
felt the freshness of the breeze sweeping
down from the white summit of Shasta, she
had a long talk with her mother on all the
events that had passed. First, she learned
that Dick was going on as well as could be
expected, for his wound was a terrible one,
and the hardship of his home-bringing,
which she had effected with such nobility
of purpose, had much aggravated the
original evil. When he had been taken into
the house, Le Maistre, who had some little
knowledge of surgical dressing, had unbound 
the bandaging in order to reset it in
a more finished manner, but, finding it in
good order, waited more skilled assistance.
An Indian runner had been sent with a
letter to the Doctor at Ashland, and twenty-four 
hours later he had appeared on the
plateau, and had brought to Dick’s aid the
latest academic skill. When he saw Esse’s
improvised splint he shook his head, but
on his unwinding the bandage, and seeing
128

how well his patient was getting on, he
grew enthusiastic on the subject of the
mechanical ability displayed in the improvisation. 
With genuine amazement he
learned that it had been effected, under
unheard-of conditions, by a young lady
who had never seen a broken limb in her
life. His wonderment increased when he
was told that the slight, pale girl whose
pulse he had just felt in the veranda had
herself carried the huge bulk of the wounded
man up the side of the mountain.
Dick’s splendid physique stood him in
good stead, and the ruthless stretching of
his leg when he was pulled from under the
bear, combined with the almost miraculous
accident of the rude splints being placed in
exact position, had already begun the cure.
The Doctor happily prognosticated that
within a month, if all went well, Dick would
be on the high road to recovery, if not able
to move about a little.
“We can never tell,” he said “ what will
129 

happen in the way of recovery with a man
like that. His simple life, with his great
energy and his plain living, make recovery
seem extraordinary to town-bred men.
But we must not judge of his health and
recovery by the standard of the towns, but
rather by the animals, who simply lie quiet
and lick their wounds, and are running
about again when a man is beginning to
realize that he is helpless!”
Miss Gimp had been up to this the
head-nurse, with Mrs. Elstree as a relief;
but Esse now joined the nursing staff,
Her mother was not altogether satisfied
about it, but did not like to make any
objection just at present. She was beginning 
to have an uneasy feeling that perhaps
Esse had seen too much of Dick at her
impressionable age, though, as yet, she did
not imagine that there could be anything
serious arising out of their unchecked companionship. 
But out of her uneasiness came
one certain thing—the complete realization
130

that Esse was no longer the child that she
had hitherto considered her. She was a
woman now, for good or ill; and whatever
she thought or did was from the standpoint
of a woman, and would have to be adhered
to with a woman’s constancy, or abandoned
with a woman’s resolve. Esse had by this
time told her mother all the incidents at
the killing of the bears, and she could not
but see that the circumstance of her own
life being saved by Dick—for, with woman’s
imagination, she realized more than any
other episode the agonized waiting till the
bear should discover her before Dick came
——as an important step in the growth of a
romantic affection. She realized as a still
stronger one the fact, as Dick repeated
to all over and over again, with increasing
freedom of speech and added emphasis of
' delivery, about her saving his life. Mrs.
Elstree therefore thought that to forbid
the girl the sick room would be to beget
or increase a desire to see the man, which
131

might develop later into something more
serious.
So Esse sat with Dick daily, reading or
talking to him whilst he was awake, which
was always charming to her; and watching 
him whilst he slept, which was a much
more dangerous pleasure, for then her
memory and imagination worked together
to weave romances which she durst not
think when his eyes were on her, and
which were not nearly so real when she was
alone. . The closed eyelids could not take
note of blush or pallor, and had no terror
for the maiden spirit in its hour of stress.
Dick was distinctly an interesting invalid.
There are men who look their worst under
such circumstances, and whose natural
petulance under pain or restraint destroys
any charm which their weakness may have
for the feminine mind; but Dick was not
such. There was about him a large-hearted
patience and a masculine dominance, on
which illness seemed to have no effect.
132

Miss Gimp, who was a born nurse, kept
him so clean, and his room so picturesque
with summer flowers, that even the memory
of his personal carelessness died away from
Esse’s mind. More than ever the man
who had saved her, and whom she had
saved, and with whom she had undergone
the adventure so sweet to look back upon,
became idealized in all those smaller details
with which the romantic simulacrum in a
woman's mind is in some degree built up.
His great amusement at this time was to
polish the bears’ claws, and to drill them
in a particular way, until finally he made a
magnificent necklace of them, which he
handed over to Esse, telling her that they
were fairly hers as she had won them.
When the time of convalescence came,
Esse became herself head-nurse. At least,
all the labour of amusing the patient seemed
to devolve on her. She sat by his side in
the veranda reading to him and playing
draughts or chess, all of which pastimes
133

were dangerous enough ; or often listening
to his stories of adventure, which was a
thousand times more dangerous. After a
while Mrs. Elstree came to understand
something of the feelings of Brabantio, as
he afterwards reflected on the method of
Desdemona’s wooing by Othello—with the
exception that she assured herself that in
no way had Dick the smallest intention of
making love. Had she known the deeper
strata of human passion she would not
have so easily thrown aside her fears with
a sigh of relief, for the very indifference of
the man to the girl’s preference, so palpable
to the mother’s eye, was perhaps the one element 
remaining to complete the daughter’s
fascination. Mrs. Elstree was, however, a
wise woman within her own limitations, and
as the summer was drawing to a close she
determined not to take any notice at present
of what was going on, but to let affairs run
their course till the return to San Francisco.
She felt that it would be a less dangerous
134

course than doing anything whilst there was
present the opportunity, in the shape of
Dick, of matters coming to a head prematurely.
At this time there were two surly people
on Shasta: one, Miss Gimp, who seemed
never to get farther in her love-making
to Dick; and the other, Heap Hungry,
whose offerings to the parrot had been cut
short by Esse, lest their continuous presence
should lead to some awkward revelation.
One morning when Esse looked out of
her window she saw the whole plateau white
with snow. It was but a tiny dusting of
the ‘ground, and had vanished before the
sun was high, But it was a warning that
the summer had gone, and that Shasta was
henceforth to be, for a time, at any rate, but
a sweet memory. When departure had
been decided upon, all the mother and
guardian became awake in Mrs. Elstree;
day and night she watched, and waited, and
bestirred herself so, that there was never an
135

opportunity for Esse to have a sentimental
leave-taking. To this end, Dick’s natural
imperturbability aided, and it was with
only a hearty handshake, and a last wave
of his cap, that Dick took leave of Esse at
the railway station at Edgewood.
Esse herself was too sorry to be very
demonstrative. She knew her own secret
now, and it took her all her time and
effort to so bear herself as to deceive her
mother.
136

VII.
The change from Shasta to San Francisco
for a time altered the course of Esse’s
thoughts. It was not merely that the
atmosphere was different or that the duties
of life, in great and little degree, were not
the same, but that there were compensations
for the loss of the bracing air, the natural
exhilaration which is given by a rarefied
atmosphere, and the unconventional companionship 
of Grizzly Dick. There were
shops! Shops whose contents were to be
investigated thoroughly and their new
treasures displayed. ‘There were concerts
with divine possibilities, and Esse was a
musician cultivated far beyond the opportunities 
of even San Francisco. Hollander,
and Paderewski, and Sarasate were all
personal friends of her mother, and from
137

each of them she had friendly counsel.
Now that she was come again in touch with
all these delightful results of civilization,
she began to feel as though the Shoulder
of Shasta were barren of the higher delights
of life—of some of them at least, Then
. there were the theatres, for to Esse a theatre
was a veritable wonderland. Like all
persons of pure imagination, the theatre
itself was but a means to an end. She did
not think of a play asa play, but asa reality,
and so her higher education—the education
of the heart, the brain, and the soul—was
pursued; and by the sequence of her own
emotion and her memory of them, she
became, each time she saw a play, to know
herself a little better, and so to better know
the world and its dwellers. Visits, too, and
dances, and the thousand and one harmless
frivolities which go to make up a woman's
life, claimed her time and her passing
interest.
And so it was that within a few weeks of
138

her return to San Francisco, Grizzly Dick
and all his romantic environment became
for the time only a distant memory, But
out of this very state of things, in which
her mother had a new sense of security,
there came a new danger. Since Dick was
only a memory, he became one with that .
particular nimbus of softening effects which
is apt to accompany and environ a memory
which is a pleasant one—that which is to a
memory what a halo is to a pictorial saint,
at once a distinguishing trait and an aid to
fancy. Esse began to feel that since Dick
was a memory he was one that could be
shared; and so each dearest friend of the
hour became in turn the recipient of her
confidence. It is an easy matter to sympathize 
with a misplaced affection; and the
slaughtering of grizzlies and the saving and
being saved by picturesque hunters, massive
of limb and quaint of speech, has a charm
for young ladies unaccustomed to the
shedding of blood. Esse began to hear
139

nothing but praise of Dick, and envious
wishes, sighingly expressed by susceptible
companions, that her chance of love had
been theirs. Thus by a subtle process,
which the Fates so thoroughly understood,
Esse began to look into her own heart with
the eyes of her friends. What she found
there she did not quite know. All was
nebulous, inchoate and dim of outline; but
it—whatever it was—had a living, breathing
charm which touched her imagination, fired
afresh all the impulses of her virgin heart,
and made her very nerves tingle at all
sweet unknown possibilities, When a girl
gets thus far into the dark forests of love
she seems to realize — historically, but last
of all by herself — the truth of that master
of the craft who said that “a woman loves
for the sake of loving.” There is something
in feminine nature which seems to have a
distinct need of expressing itself in some
form of self-abnegation. It may be that
there is a bacillus of love, which, when once
140

it finds an entry into the human heart, goes
on multiplying itself, as other microbes do
when finding their “final” destination; or
it may be that it is a virus which can affect
all around it in ever-widening area. But.
be it what it may, and work how it will, one
thing is certain, that when once this idea
has become conscious to a woman and she
can locate its cause, the process of its
growth is a natural one, and nothing in the
world can stop it. Thus Esse, having begun
the new phase of her feeling towards Dick
by finding in him a sort of hero of romance,
began to exaggerate her own feelings:
towards him; and finally grew to believe
that she had acted rather badly towards
him.
And here her memory, spurred on thereto 
by her wishes, began to play her tricks.
She construed in the secrecy of her own
soul the indifference of their parting into a
wrong to him; and remorse began to assail
her, She seemed to remember a certain
141

sadness in his beautiful eyes — for by this
time his eyes had become to her memory
beautiful—and to have all the wealth of
varied and passionate expression which is
the possession of a young woman’s fancy.
As one by one the thousand little incidents
of Dick’s illness and convalescence came
back to her mind they came accompanied
by all sorts of added charms on his part and
small defects on her own, which fed the fires
of her remorse ; so that it was not long until
as she sat thinking and recollecting her eyes
would fill with unbidden tears.
This process of Esse’s mental unhinging
was aided by the care which her mother
took to avoid the subject. She had seen
that Esse had resumed her old life where
she had left it, and was rejoiced that she
did so with a physical improvement which
she had hardly dared at the beginning to
hope for. Mrs. Elstree prided herself on
her worldly wisdom, and took special satisfaction 
to herself that by her patient forbearance
142

at Shasta, she was now enabled
to let well alone, without any fear of her
attitude, positive or negative, being misunderstood 
by her daughter. Had she
been a more experienced woman, she would
not have avoided the subject of Dick, but
from her.superior position of manifested
tolerance could have minimized the effect
of his picturesque romance by judicious
belittlement. As it was, her silence seemed
to Esse a want of appreciation on her part
of Dick’s heroic qualities; and so it left her
daughter to the dangers of her own imagination, 
with its active and reactive power on
memory, and to the less wise sympathies of
her girl companions. In the world of Esse’s
imaginings as to how Dick bore her absence,
she began to invest him with a despairing
loneliness which became in time but the coordinate 
feeling of her own heart.
Naturally her brooding on this theme,
and the secrecy which as naturally became
imposed upon her when once she had come
143

to understand its existence, told in time
upon her health. She began to grow pale
and listless; with poignant fear her mother
realized that she was lapsing into her old
condition of ill-health — with the added
drawback that she had in the meantime
passed from girlhood to womanhood, and
that her secret tears whose traces she could
not always conceal, showed that a new and
dangerous emotional side of her nature had
been developed. Mrs. Elstree thought and
thought the matter over patiently, prayerfully, 
doubtingly, and with a vague, deadly
fear which at times became an anguish.
She could not conceal from herself that
there might be some deep-lying cause in
the shape of an unrequited affection, and
naturally she thought that Grizzly Dick
might be the object of it. Well, she had
known from the observation of her own life
and that of the companions of her youth,
the truth that was told in Viola’s true-false
tale :
144

“She never told her love
But let concealment, like a worm i’ the bud,
Feed on her damask cheek.”
She took counsel with Miss Gimp on the
subject, and even asked her opinion as to
the possibility of Dick being the object — if
indeed, there was one. Under ordinary
circumstances the perspicacity of the two
elder women who loved her, might have
found a way to the knowledge of Esse’s
secret, and have also found a way for her to
its settlement ; but Miss Gimp’s own feeling
for Dick became at once a bar to the
knowledge. She had in the discussion her
own secret to keep, and this involved a
putting aside of the subject altogether.
She had also her own end to serve, for she
still regarded Dick as a victim to her
charms, and a possible object of her settlement 
in life. In slang phrase she had “her
own axe to grind” in the matter, and looked
upon the possibility of Esse’s falling in love
with Dick as a direct infringement of her
145

own rights. She was only human — and
woman — and the stalwartness of her opinion
on the subject of Dick set Mrs. Elstree’s
doubts on the subject almost at rest. She
determined however to be assured, and took
an early opportunity of touching on the
subject with Esse herself. She was, however, 
delicately careful only to touch on the
subject in such a manner as not to arouse
Esse’s suspicions, in case the idea should
have no basis in fact, and not to put such
an idea in her head, in case it was not fixed
there already. And as Esse wished to
keep her secret from her mother, who she
felt by this time assured would not understand 
it, it was no wonder that the conversation 
had the result of clearing all doubts
from Mrs. Elstree’s mind and leaving her
under the impression that she had Esse’s
direct assurance that Dick had no place —
and no possible place — in her affections.
The schoolmen doubtless believed when
they came to formulate the rules of logic
146

that the suppressio veri and the suggestio
falsi were emanations from the mature
intellect of man. Widely they erred! for
Eve, the first of women, understood them to
the full, and it was in that stage of her
existence which coincided with a later
woman’s girlhood that -— before she had
known Adam and begun to understand the
more simple directness of his man’s thought
and ways—she most fully understood their
advantages. Since her time no young
woman has ever failed to conceal, by their
use, her thoughts on the subject of her
affections —— when she wished to do so — more
efficaciously than a man can conceal his by
the direct method of a denial accompanied
by blows.
Now and again Esse wore the necklace
of bears’ claws, for she felt that to omit
doing so occasionally would arouse her
mother’s suspicion ; and it was sweet to be
able to have so close to her something
which was in every way a manifest link
147

between her and Dick. But she continued
to grow thinner and paler; and the heart of
her mother grew sadder as the time went on.
There came to visit their home in California 
Street an old friend who occupied a
sort of brotherly position towards both
mother and daughter. He had been an
intimate friend of Esse’s father, and on the
marriage of the latter had become equally
a friend of his young wife. This relationship 
was not changed even by his own
marriage or by Mr. Elstree’s death, for his
wife became, as it were, a partner in the
friendly concern, and when Mr. Elstree
died he left a letter asking him to look
after his wife and daughter, and aid them 
by his help and counsel. He did not
burden him with the trusteeship or care of
their affairs, for the fortune which he had
left to them was sufficiently great to be
a care in itself. Peter Blyth was now
approaching middle age, and seemed to
have gathered to himself in his progress
148

through life all its pleasant possibilities and
advantages. He followed, or had followed
at some time or other, quite a number of
avocations, so that his knowledge was as
varied as his taste and sympathy; and as
in every phase of his career he had some
distinct points of contact with the needs
and doings of men he had arrived at a
large and tolerant knowledge of human
nature. Esse, from her earliest childhood,
had known him as a sort of big brother,
and had never called him anything but
Peter. From him had always come to her
something that was pleasant or helpful,
from the days that she used to wheedle
him into producing the toy or sweet that
she knew was waiting for her in the deep
recess of some pocket. When she was in
any trouble, either of her own or others’
doing, she relied on him confidently to see
her through it; and even when she had
suffered any childish pain, to hold Peter’s
hand was a distinct ease and help to her.
149

Naturally between the two had grown up
a rare confidence, and up to now in her life
Esse had never had a secret which Peter
Blyth had not shared. The years that
had passed had not aged him in any way,
except in the limiting of his physical buoyancy, 
and in strewing a few white hairs
through the thickness of his curly brown
beard. This beard of Peter Blyth’s was
the feature on which a physiognomist
would have lingered longest in the setting
forth of his character, for it gave a distinctive 
quality to other features which, though
altogether good, were in no wise remarkable. 
From his beard, and what was all
around it, could be deduced the fact that
he belonged to the antique rather than the
modern world, and distinctly to the pagan
school of life. It was not that he was
sceptical, for he was not; nor that he was
assailed with unconquered doubts, for he
had his moods of acquiescence in the fitness 
of things, and the opposite, as have
150

all men in whose veins the red blood of
life flows freely. But there was about him
a large-hearted, easy tolerance which made
any limited phase of thought a thing rather
despicable to him than abhorrent. For all
“isms” he had only contempt, from Calvin
to Ibsen; all who held with the ungenerous
side of beliefs could not move him from
intellectual placidity. His throat had the
broad smooth lines which we see in the old
busts of Jupiter, and his mouth and chin,
which, taken separately, showed the two
poles of resolution and of power of enjoyment, 
pronounced, when taken together, for
a conscious Jove de vivre, which was most
certainly not a characteristic of his time.
When he saw Esse his instinct and his
knowledge jumped to one conclusion — that
there was some secret cause for her low
condition, but with characteristic caution
he did not’ betray himself. He then and
there determined to take an early opportunity 
of learning from the girl herself how
151

matters stood. To this end he had a long
talk with Mrs. Elstree, and in the course
of it gathered all the events, great and
small, of the life at Shasta. Not content
with Mrs. Elstree’s confidence, he took an
opportunity of learning the opinions of
Miss Gimp, and thus armed, he felt himself 
fairly confident of finding out in his
talk with Esse the true inwardness of
things.
The next morning he came to breakfast
with his mind made up as to how he should
discuss affairs with Esse. He knew already
from her mother all that that dear lady
knew, including her put-aside suspicion of
an attachment between Esse and Dick,
and as he had discovered her mother was
manifestly not in Esse’s secret, whatever it
might be, he knew that there was need for
extreme caution. To this end he .determined 
that time should not be of vital importance, 
for the telling of a secret means
on a woman’s part a gradual yielding to her
152

own wishes, and a not impossible accompaniment 
of tears; so he opened the matter
with a frank remark:
“You're not looking well, Esse! Too
many dances and sittings-out in the conservatory. 
Suppose you put on your bonnet
and come with me for a drive. A whiff of
sea air will do us both good.” Esse looked
at her mother appealingly, and on her
nodding acquiescence, assented joyfully, so
Peter Blyth went off to look for a buggy
suitable to the occasion. He shortly drove
up in a very snappy one, with a pair of
horses that looked like 2 40 speed. Esse
came to the stoop with a lighter footstep
than she had used for many a day, and,
her mother noticing it, said to herself, with
a sigh of relief, “The dear child is only
tired. She feels already with Peter like
her old self.”
As they swept up and down the steep
hills that lay between them and the Pacific
Peter Blyth tried his best to put and keep
153


Esse in a gay humour. He told her all
his best and newest stories, and so interested 
her with all the little things which
had happened in her London home since
she had last seen it, that when they came
to Sutro Heights Esse was looking more
like her old—or, rather, her new—self
than she had done since she had parted .
with Dick at Shasta.
Peter put up his trap at the Cliff
House, and having ordered luncheon for a
couple of hours later, the two strolled out
along the beach to the southward. When
they had gone some distance they sat
down on a patch of sea grass and looked
around them. Below their feet, beyond a
narrow strip of yellow sand, was the vast
blue of the silent Pacific, its breast scarcely
moved by the ripple of a passing breeze.
Southwards the headlands, dimly blue and
purple, ran out, tier upon tier, into the sea;
northwards the mountains towered brown
above the Golden Gate. Both were impressed
154

with the full, silent beauty of the
scene, and for a time neither spoke. Then
Peter, turning to Esse, said:
“What is it, dear, that is troubling you ?”
Esse started, and a vivid blush swept
swiftly over her face, and then left her pale.
“What do you mean?” was her answer,
given in a faint voice. For reply Peter
took both her hands in his, and said:
“Look here, little girl, that’s the first
time in all your life that you ever asked
me what J meant. Do you really mean,
Esse, that you don’t understand? Tell me,
dear! I only want to help you! Don’t
you know what I mean?” .
Esse’s “yes,” came in a faint voice.
Peter went on:
“Now that clears the ground. We understand 
each other. Tell me all about it,
Esse! Confession is good for the soul;
and I don’t think you'll ever find a softer-hearted 
father confessor than your old
friend.”
155

“Must I tell, Peter?” She spoke in
an appealing way, but it. was manifest to
him that she wished to be treated in such
a way that her natural obedience would
help her. So he smiled a broad, genial
smile, and seeing that her face brightened,
he attempted a chastened laugh, and flung
some of his good-humoured man-of-the-world 
philosophy at her:
“ Look here, little girl, when we human
beings have any secret that’s pretty difficult 
to tell, and that we had rather not tell
our mothers, it’s generally about the opposite 
sex. When it’s a girl that has to do
the telling, well! she’s best off when she
can get it off her chest to some sympathetic
soul that won't give her away. Nature
demands that she tells some one, and that
some one must be either. a friend or the
Other Fellow. If it’s the Other Fellow
then there’s no need to tell the friend! But
in that case there are rosy cheeks instead 
of pale ones, and the harmonies of
156

life are set in a full major key instead of
the minor. See?” Esse nodded. Peter
continued :
“I'll help you all I can, little girl, now
and hereafter. Your father was my dearest
friend, and one of his last acts was to write
to me asking me to look after you and your
mother, and to do what I could for you
both. If he were here, my dear, you
wouldn't need to talk to me! Shut your
eyes, little girl, and pretend that he is with
you, and open out your heart to him.
Don’t fear to! Every girl has to, and it is
well for them that there are fathers and
brothers and friends, to whom they can
speak ; for otherwise there would be a deal
more sorrow in the world even than there
is!” Esse took his hand in hers and
turned away her head, hiding her face with
her other hand, and said in a low voice:
“I want to see Dick!” Peter’s reply
was given with heartiness, although her
words sent a mild chill through him. He
157

had almost come to this conclusion already,
and he saw trouble -— possibly great trouble
—- ahead for his little friend :
“Grizzly Dick! I’ve heard all about
him, and a mighty fine fellow he must be.
No wonder you want to see him, little girl,
after all you and he went through together.
When your mother was telling me last
night about the bears, I was looking at the
skins of the two monsters, and thinking
that I’d like to shake hands with the fellow
that shared that danger with you, and that
you were so good to!”
Esse said nothing, but he could tell by
the pressure of her fingers on his hand
that his words touched her, so he waited a
minute or two before going on. Then he
asked suddenly :
“Esse, do you want to see him so
badly? Is he all the world to you, so that
his not being here makes life, with all
the good things which it has for you,
of no account? Tell me! Speak freely;
158

don’t be afraid!” Esse turned her face
round, and her eyes were all swimming
with unfallen tears. At this moment her
heart was full of Dick, and she could look
unabashed at Peter whilst she spoke:
“Oh, yes! I want to see him so. The
whole world seems so small and cramped
without him! If I could only see him for
a moment it would be like feeling the wind
blowing down from Shasta—like hearing
the roar of the falling water—like the
sound of the forest coming up at the dawn!
It all seems so little here, and he is so
brave and strong, and moves through life
as though he were born to rule it!” Peter
Blyth sat silent, amazed. The young
girl’s poetic phrases, her full, passionate
way of speaking; the very openness of her
avowal, were all strange and new to him,
and he felt that he must learn more, and
then consider well his store of knowledge ;
so again he asked her:
“Esse, do you think you love him?’
159

She immediately began to cry quietly, and
it was only when he had petted and comforted 
her a little that she was able to
reply :
“I don’t know! I don’t know!” and
Peter muttered to himself:
“ Hanged if I do, either!” then he went
on with his questioning :
“Now, tell me just one thing — I only
want your opinion — do you think he loves
you?”
“ He never told me so.”
“No, but what do you think?” Esse
turned to him with all the coquetry of her
nature ablaze, and asked:
“What do you think?” Peter Blyth
instantly laughed a merry, wholesome laugh
which seemed somehow to find an echo in
the very recesses of Esse’s soul. Somewhere 
there was hope and comfort for her.
This winning trust in a man’s power to
smooth matters, and the consequent shifting
of the burden from her own shoulders was
160

beginning already to work for her recovery.
She laughed too, though the laugh smote
Peter with pain, for it was like the ghost
of her old cheery laugh; but he was glad
to hear any approach to merriment, and
took advantage of the occasion.
“Come on! Let us get to lunch, and
then we shall be able to think better, We
know now; our next step will be to see
what is best to be done, and then to do
it!” Esse took his outstretched hand,
and so, hand-in-hand, they walked by the
sea together. Suddenly he stopped and
said :
“ Look here, little girl, you mustn’t go
into the hotel with your eyes like that.
They'd think that 7 was the lover, and that
I had been quarrelling with you!” He
put his hand into his pocket and took out
a tiny parcel which he handed to her.
Esse took it with curiosity and opened it.
Out fluttered a gauzy veil.
“ Well, I do declare!” she said, I believe
161

this is a put-up job, and that you expected
me to cry, and were prepared for it.”
“Of course I did,” said Peter, boldly.
‘What else did I come out here for except
that you and I might be alone, and that
you could tell me your troubles! I knew
you would cry! all girls do—under the
circumstances!” and he laughed a resonant
and ease-giving laugh. So she took his
arm and they walked back to the hotel.
162

VII.
When her mother saw Esse, her heart was
filled with gladness, for her pallor had
given way to a cheerful tinge of rose, and
her manner was buoyant and exhilarated.
«Well, I declare,” said she, turning to Peter
Blyth, “an hour or two with you has done
her more good than all the doctors in San
Francisco in three months. You must
take her in hand, and prescribe for her a
bit, if you will.” By this time Esse had
tripped upstairs to get ready for tea, and
Peter, seeing his opportunity, wished to
get from Mrs. Elstree a comprehensive
consent to whatever he might see well to
do. All the way home, after lunch, whilst
Esse had been chattering to him with
all the energy of an emancipated soul, he
had been thinking. The problem which
163

he had to solve was a difficult one, and he
felt that all his diplomatic acumen would be
required. He could not believe that his
highly cultured, ‘refined little friend Esse
whose fastidiousness, even in her babyhood,
had been a little joke in the family, could
be really in love with a rough, unmannered
trapper. And yet he could not deceive
himself that at the present time Esse had
an absorbing desire to meet the man; that
the unsatisfied desire was sapping her
health, and that it would be necessary
to take the matter seriously as the only
chance of an ultimate solution of the difficulty. 
It might be that Esse’s craving
was for the mountain as well as the man;
that the place and its possibilities, its adventures, 
its bracing qualities, the stimulation
of the high mountain air and the whole
wild, free exuberance which had come into
her life at the moment when her womanhood 
was developing, and as cure for her
failing health, had seized on her imagination.
164

In such case, her sense of contrast and the
strongly humorous side of her character
would be her best protection. In any
case, the man was at present so inextricably
mixed up in her mind with his surroundings
that without his presence no disentanglement 
could take place. Of course, it might
be that when Esse should see him the
vague desire for his presence might become
an actuality, and that nothing short of
marriage with him would content her.
If so, then the chance must be taken, for
it could not be allowed that her present
declining health should not be considered ;
and if marriage became a necessity, at
least Esse had at her disposal all the means
of comfort for them both In a word, the
argument ran in his mind: if she should
not see Dick she would in all probability
fade away and die. If she should see him,
one of two things must happen—she would
become disenchanted, which was all desirable, 
or her infatuation would increase
165

until it ended in an undesirable marriage.
In any case she must see him.
She must see him — that was certain;
and this conclusion having been arrived at,
Peter's next point was as to the most
advisable way of this accomplishment.
There was already experience of the ill
effects of her seeing him when his foot
was on his native heath. There he was
paramount, and his whole personality
gathered round itself the romance of the
surroundings. If Esse were to see him on
Shasta under her present psychic and
nervous condition, she would simply tumble
head over ears in love with him. There
was nothing at all to the contrary ; whereas
if she were to see him in the midst of her
present refined surroundings, she could not
help contrasting him with them, with a
result that could not altogether tend to
further infatuation. Dick therefore must
come to San Francisco! Peter felt that
his logic was complete, and that no further
166

thought on that part of the subject was
required. Thus he had driven up to
California Street with his mind so far at
rest, and his only present intent that Mrs.
Elstree should, without even guessing at
his knowledge, be content to leave the
affair in his hands. So when Esse had
gone to her room he turned to Mrs. Elstree
and said :
“To you really wish me to prescribe ?”
“Most certainly! Look at the effect of
your first dose!”
“ And you will not blame me if anything
should happen that you don’t contemplate ;
or as you should not wish?” Mrs. Elstree
put both her hands in his and said:
“Peter Blyth whatever you do will be
for Esse’s good. That is your intention I
am sure. I know it; and my dear husband
knew it. None of us are infallible; but you
are at least a true friend and a clever man.
Do what you will for my dear child’s good.
Nothing can be worse than to see her
167

fading away from me, as it has been my
misery to watch for months past.” She
turned away her head, but Peter could see
that she was crying as she left the room.
When she returned she was cheerful,
though there were traces of tears in her
eyes. Women have a sort of fixed idea
that bathing the eyes with watered eau-de-cologne 
will remove traces of tears ; it is a
happy belief, saving much small humiliation,
and there are men generous enough to
pretend that they are deceived !
After dinner Peter Blyth sat with Esse
in the back of. the drawing-room, whilst
her mother in the music-room opening from
it played Liszt and Chopin. His manner
was hearty, and his laugh so cheery, that it
would have been impossible for Esse to have
in his presence been under the domination
of any brooding or love-sick fancies, so she
fell into the buoyant mood. Now that the
strain of keeping her secret was past she
felt able to discuss it without doing violence
168

to her feelings. Peter opened the battle
with a point-blank shot:
" I have thought all over what you told
me, and I have come to a conclusion.”
Esse’s heart seemed to cease to beat, and
she simply listened, “1 think Dick had
better come here!” A blush rose under
the girl's eyes, and steadily grew, till cheeks
and forehead, and ears and neck, were all
flushed to a deep crimson. She put her
hands before her face but still sat silent.
Peter went on:
“I take it, Esse, that this has your
approval ?” she nodded.
“I take it also that it is your wish ?”
again she nodded.
“I take it also that I may—that you
wish me to convey to Dick the strong
feeling that you have towards him, the
keen desire to see him,’—-here Esse broke
in:
“Oh, Peter, must that be?” .
“I fear, my dear, that it will be necessary.
169

He might not be willing to come without
such assurance. You see he does not know
me at all!”
“But wouldn’t it be like my asking
him?” Peter laughed cheerfully :
“It would be uncommonly like it. There
is no possible mistake about that! But
then the whole thing is uncommon! It is
not common that you should care for a
man away outside the class you have been
reared in; the occasions that threw you
together were uncommon. It is uncommon
that I should be holding this conversation
with you all the time that your mother is playing 
there in the next room so uncommonly
well. I take it also that I had better Jet Dick
know that there may be — later on — a more
tender feeling between you?” Esse paused.
It seemed to her like the probing of a wound
this questioning by Peter; and yet it was
done with the same matter-of-factness .
which distinguishes the work of an able .
surgeon, The wounded have to suffer,
170

and it does not matter if the wound be
inflicted by a bullet, or an arrow, or a
knife. But there was about the whole
thing a sort of business atmosphere, some-
thing which tends to suppress romance and
to bring into unpleasant prominence the
sternest facts; and Esse could not but feel
that she was rather following up the logic of
the part than expressing her present feelings 
when she replied from behind her
sheltering hands:
“I suppose so!”
“Good!” said Peter. “ Now I know
exactly where I am!” and he rose up to
join his hostess in the music-room, whilst
Esse lay back amongst the deep cushions of
her chair, thinking what a queer place the
world is, when even the realization of one’s
wishes is not a matter of unqualified happiness, 
and beginning to wonder if Dick
would think it strange of her sending such
a message. Then she began to wonder
how her San Francisco friends with their
171

fastidiousness, their fondness for the ridiculous 
side of things, and their haughty
pride at times, would look on Dick,
And then she began to think how Dick
would look amongst his new and unaccustomed 
surroundings. A thousand
little traits and habits of his, which she
now wished that she had forgotten, recalled
themselves to her memory, and she thought
it would have been better that she had not
told Peter so much, until, at all events, she
had some opportunity of seeing that Dick
was better schooled to conventional usages.
But that could never be until Peter told
him! The whole thing was getting so
tangled that she could not follow it; and so
she stole out of the room, leaving Peter
talking to her mother as she played on, and
went to bed.
Esse was beginning to feel that an unconventional 
attachment was not without
its drawbacks. The cure was commencing
to work !
172

Next morning, at breakfast, Peter mentioned 
that he had had a telegram which
would compel him to go at once to New
York. It might be, that from New York
he might have to go on to London; but
this was only a possibility, and in any
case, his visit home need be only a short
one. He would, he expected, be back in
San Francisco in a couple of months at the
latest. Mrs. Elstree was truly sorry that
he had to go so soon, but hoped that he
would soon be back, and Esse looked at
him with a flush and endorsed her mother's
sentiments. He received many commissions, 
and went up to dress for his journey,
Before he left he said to both ladies:
“I think I have my commissions all
right. Do either of you want to alter
anything ?” There was no reply, and off
he went.
Esse had a half-feeling that she would
like to countermand all that she had asked
Peter to do, or had acquiesced in his doing.
173

Womanlike, she began to have misgivings
when once the bolt had sped, and, womanlike, 
she felt personally freer now that she
had committed herself to a definite act.
Peter Blyth left the eastward train at
Sacramento, and took the Portland train
on his way north. He had posted himself
thoroughly as to the route, and had telegraphed 
to the station-master at Edgewood
to have procured for him horses and a guide
to Shasta. On his arrival he found all ready
for him, and setting out at once, made good
way before stopped by the darkness. Early
the next day he arrived at the Shoulder of
Shasta, and leaving his guide and horses
on the plateau, went at once to Dick’s
cottage.
All the way up the mountain he had
been thinking of the strange job which he
had undertaken ; and the higher he got, the
more the ridiculous side of it came to the
front. Here was he, a man of middle age,
climbing up an almost desolate snow-clad
174

mountain, to find a hunter who probably
couldn’t read or write, and to ask him to
marry a particularly refined and cultivated
young heiress. He had no clue to the
man’s style, or thought, or ideas, and he
‘could only surmise what his reception might
be. Like a good many Londoners, his
sole knowledge of the actuality of Western
life was from “ Buffalo Bill” and the “ Wild
West Show,” and, from the rough-and-ready
energy displayed by some of the participants 
in these Olympic Games up-to-date,
he had strange imaginings as to what his
welcome might be like in case he should be
regarded as a meddlesome fool — a capacity
which, to do him justice, he felt that he
filled with quite sufficient satisfactoriness.
By the time he had arrived at Dick’s cabin
he felt not only ridiculous, but in a sort of
“funk,” an unusual thing with him. With
somewhat of the feelings of a schoolboy,
who learns on calling that the dentist is
absent, he found that the cabin door, was
175

locked. He had, however, a duty to do,
and he did not mean to shirk it, be it never
so ridiculous or unpleasant; and so went
back to his guide to breakfast.
When he returned to the cabin, an hour
later, he found the door unlocked; the
owner, however, was absent. He went in
and seated himself, awaiting his coming.
As he sat, all his unpleasant surmises came
back to his mind, and he called himself —-
inwardly —- an unmitigated ass, until the
image of Esse’s pale face came before him
and nerved him. He looked round the
cabin, and, as he saw its meagreness and
absolute destitution of refinement, he could
not bring himself to believe that Esse could
really and truly love a man who lived in
such a way. The exhilarating air of the
mountain, somehow seemed to increase his
natural buoyancy of spirits, and he felt that
he wanted to laugh, but the gravity of his.
mission restrained him.
There came a shadow in the doorway
176

and Dick entered, quite unconscious that
there was a stranger in his house. When
Peter Blyth saw him, the contrast between
his appearance and the purpose of his
mission was so great that it burst the
barriers of his gravity, and the long pent-up 
laughter broke forth in a flood. He
tried to rise, but he was helpless with his
paroxysm of cachinnation, and sank back
again, and shook whilst Dick looked on in
a sequence of emotions. First he was
amazed, then somewhat indignant;. and,
finally, his kindly nature yielded to the
humour of the situation, and, throwing back
his head, he joined in the laughter till the
rafters rang. :
There certainly was ground for Peter's
laughter when one took in calmly Dick’s
appearance as the proposee of marriage on
the part of a young lady. He had just
come back from a hunt of several days’
duration, and bore all the signs of hardship 
and turmoil. Manifestly, he had not
177

washed, even his hands, for several days ;
his hair was matted and wild looking —
unkempt would have been an inadequate
word to describe its condition. His clothes
were creased with sleeping in them, and
were encrusted in places with mud, wherein
had stuck bits of twig, dead leaves and pine
needles; and from head to foot he was
smothered with grease and blood. Killing
and skinning big game is not an esthetic
occupation, and is apt to leave just the
same traces on the operator as on the artist
who wields the knife in a Chicago packing
house. In sober truth, he looked like a
large, rough, peculiarly dirty, and slovenly
butcher on leaving his work. Across his
shoulders he carried the skinned carcase of
a deer, from which dripped on the floor
drops of blood, till they formed a little
glittering pool.
Dick, with a hitch of his mighty shoulder,
dropped the carcase on the floor, and stood
looking admiringly at Peter Blyth, whilst
178

joining in his laugh; then he sat down
opposite him on a rough stool, which he
drew towards him by crooking a toe round
its leg, and went on with his laugh in greater
comfort. Presently Peter began to realize
that he was in a more amazingly ridiculous
position than that which he had feared, and,
with a certain feeling of shamefacedness,
felt his laughter die away as he began to
gasp out apologies. Dick leaned over, and,
lifting a mighty hand, smote the other’s
thigh as he roared out:
“ Durn me, stranger, but ye’re welcome.
I hain’t seen a man laugh so hearty in all
. my born days, an’ I hain’t had such a laugh
myself since I seen the Two Macs split one
another's heads open at the Empire Saloon
in Sacramento. My! but I’m glad to see
ye, though who the hell ye are, or why
ye’re here, is more’n I know yet. But
we'll know in time. Have ye breakfasted?
Tm nearly famished myself; but I’ve
brought in a roast,” he designated it by a
179

kick, “ and we'll soon have a blaze and get
fixed right up!” Before Peter could say
anything he had strode to the fireplace, and
stirring up the embers with his foot, had
thrown on them an armful of dried twigs.
In a few seconds a fierce blaze was roaring
up the rude chimney, and very shortly a
chunk of the buck, hung on an iron hook,
was already beginning to splutter in the
heat. Peter offered to help, but the other
waved him back :
“No, sir! This is my shanty, an’ ye’re
my guest! Ye’re as welcome in it as the
flowers of May. Jest ye sit down and
try to get ready another laugh for after
breakfast, while I get the fixin’s ready. I
hope ye can eat saleratus bread ; it’s all we
get up here this time o' year.” As he
spoke he was making tea, and setting out
his rude table with workmanlike dexterity.
Peter could not but admire him as he
moved, for notwithstanding his big bulk he
was always in perfect poise, and in everything
180

he did he seemed perfect master of
it; and he soon lost sight, or at least consciousness, 
of his dirt and blood, and saw
only the splendid specimen of natural manhood, 
so magnificently equipped for his
wild mountain life and so nobly unconscious
of his surroundings.
Peter Blyth felt his feelings mingled ;
half being of shame that he had so underestimated 
his host, the other of anxiety as
to the future. Matters did not seem of
such simple solution as he had imagined.
Hecould not but feel that there was a basis
for Esse’s unsettlement rather wider than
he had thought possible.
When breakfast was ready he sat at
table with enjoyment, and, despite want of
tablecloth, napkin, or any of the luxuries to
which he was accustomed, made a hearty
meal. As for Dick he ate to such an
extent that Peter had serious misgivings as
to whether he might not do himself an
injury. When hunger was satisfied Dick
181

took two pipes and handed one of them to
Peter with the tobacco canister, and drawing 
up a rude armchair to one side of the fireplace 
motioned Peter into it ; he took his
own seat in a similar one on the other side.
Then he commenced the conversation :
“ Now, stranger! Wire in, and tell me
all about it!” Peter Blyth saw that the
difficult part of his task was at hand, and
went straight at it:
“I am a friend of Mrs. Elstree and of
Esse!” Dick rose up and held out a large
hand.
“Wall, ye were welcome. before, but ef
that’s yer racket, there ain’t no welcome
under this ar roof big enough or good
enough for ye. Shake!” Then Peter
experienced the force of Dick’s pump-handle 
act of friendship ; and, like Esse and
her mother, felt that Nature might easily
have been forgiven if she had gifted her
child with a lesser measure of manual
power. One good thing, however, was
182

accomplished, the two men were en rapport,
and Peter’s task became more possible.
He went on:
“My name is Blyth—Peter Blyth ; but
no one ever calls me anything but Peter!
I hope you will be like the rest!”
“ All right, Peter!” said Dick cheerfully.
“ Drive along!”
“I saw both the ladies two days ago.
Mrs. Elstree did not know I was coming
here or she would, J am sure, have sent you
her very warm greeting. Esse, however,
knew that I was coming, and sent her love.”
“Lor bless her! Little Missy, I hope
she’s keepin’ peart an’ clipper? She kem
up here as white as a lily; but me an’
Shasta soon set her up, an’ she went away
like a rose!” Here Peter saw an opportunity 
of arousing Dick’s pity, and at once
took advantage of it.
“Poor little girl!” he said, “I fear she
is not at all so well as she should be. She
looked pretty pale when I saw her.”
183

“Do tell! The poor purty Little Missy.
I wouldn’t see her sick for all the world.”
“Tm sure of that, old fellow! And it
would gladden her heart to hear you say
that!”
“Well, I should smile! Why, I don’t
suppose that by this time she remembers
there’s such a man as me!”
“No, no, Dick—you mustn’t think that!
Esse thinks more of you than you imagine.
Indeed, that’s why I’m here now!”
“Why you're here? Say, stranger, you're
talking conundrums!” Peter felt the drops
gather on his forehead ; he was in the thick
of it now, and spoke out boldly.
“ Look here, Dick, I’ve come up here on
purpose to speak with you! May I speak
frankly, as man to man?”
“You bet!”
“And you promise that you will never
repeat what I say?” Again the horny
hand was held out :
“Shake!” The promise was recorded.
184

“ Dick, that poor little girl is fretting her
heart out to see you again!”
“No!” the wonderment ended in a short
laugh. “Goon! What's yer game? Oh,
yere a funny one, ye are!” and he
gave his guest a playful push that almost
sent him headlong into the fire, whilst
his laughter seemed to Peter to hum and
buzz amongst the rafters. Peter went on
seriously :
“Honest Indian, Dick! I give you my
word of honour that the little girl has been
thinking of you till she has nearly broken
her heart for want of seeing you. She is
as pale as a ghost, and her poor mother has
been fretting her life out about her. Now,
won't you do something for her ?”
“Do somethin’! Why look here! ye
may take the full of her purty little body of
blood out of my veins for her, if that will
do her any good!” This time it was Peter
Blyth who held out his hand, and said:
“Shake!” Then he went on:
185

“You know, Dick — or perhaps you don’t
know, living up here all alone — that young
girls have strange fancies, and their affections 
don’t always go where their elders
would like to see them. Esse has been a
good deal with you, they tell me, all last
summer; and after all, yowre a man! By
George, you are all that! And she’s a
woman! And it seems to me — you understand, 
old man! Why need I go on!” A
blush, a distinct and veritable blush, as pronounced 
as might be found in any ladies’
seminary in San Francisco suffused Dick’s
face, and he turned away with a little simper 
that would not have disgraced a schoolgirl, 
“Why, ye don’t mean to say,” he
went on sheepishly, “that that purty thing
wants me for her bo?” His bashfulness
kept him silent, and Peter Blyth looked on
in fresh wonderment to see such awkward
modesty so manifestly displayed in the
person of such a blood-stained ruffian as he
looked. Dick’s embarrassment, however,
186

was only momentary, and ended, as did
most of his emotions, in a peal of laughter.
Peter looked on with qualified amusement ;
it would have been all pure fun to him only
for the memory of Esse’s pale face in the
background, Dick suddenly stopped and
said :
“What do ye want me to do?”
“That’s right, old chap! I want you to
find your way down to San Francisco, and
let Esse get a glimpse of you. It will
bring back to her all this beautiful mountain,
and she'll feel the wind from the snow peak
blowing once more on her, if I know her!”
“Good, I'll come! It can’t be for a few
weeks yet, for | have undertaken a contract
that I must get through with; but Pl
come. That’s cert! Where does she live
in Frisco?”
“In California Street, No. 437, the big
house with the stone seals on the steps.
Dick, you’re a brick! Old man, you'll be
very tender with her, will you not? Remember
187

it was a great struggle to her to let
me gather even so much of her wishes as I
did. She's only a young girl; and you
must make things easy for her! Won't
you? Don't shame her by making any
overture come from her ?”
“Say, what’s that? Over what?”
“Overture! It means, old man, that
you mustn’t leave it to her to do the lovemaking, 
if there’s any to be done.”
“Hold hard there, pard! Easy up the
hill! I ain’t much of a feller I know, an’
my breedin’ has been pretty rough; but I
ain’t such a fool as to leave no girl to do
the courtin’ when I’m on the racket! Ye
make yer mind easy !—Say, must ye go?”
for Peter had risen.
“Yes, Dick, I’m bound to be in New
York without a day's delay. I’ve important 
business awaiting me there; and say,
Dick, if things don’t turn out as I think,
and as you may think too, when you see
her, you'll make it easy for her, won’t you?”
188

Dick looked a perfect giant as he stood in
the doorway following out his guest, for all
the manhood of him seemed to swell within
him, and to glorify him till the blood and
dirt on him seemed as if Viking adjuncts to
his mighty personality. His words came
deep and resonant as from one who meant
them :
“Look you here, pard! That dear little
lady is the truest and bravest comrade that
ever a man had! She stayed by me in
the forest, when it was good time for her
to go, with the biggest grizzly on the California 
slope comin’ up express. She fou't
him, for me, an’ killed him. An’ then she
wouldn't leave me, even to get help; but
she carried me alone, although she was
wounded herself, more’n a mile up the
mountain side! She took me outen the
grave and hell and the devil, an’ I ain’t
goin’ to go back on her, so help me God!
I don’t want to be no trouble to her, nor no
sorrow, an’ I think it’s a mistake of her
189

choosin’ such a man as me—but I tell ye
this: She'll do with me what she likes, an’
how she likes, an’ when she likes, an’ whar
she likes! The wind doesn’t blow that’s
a-goin’ to blow between her and me, if she
wants me by her side!”
190

VIII.
When Esse found that there was a possibility 
of her again seeing Dick she began
to become reconciled to the existing condition 
of things. It was true that as yet
she had only a glimmer of hope, for Peter
Blyth had not been explicit as to his intentions. 
In the first place he might not be
able to find Dick, for his journey to New
York, and possibly to Europe, might eventuate 
in complications which would forbid
his returning to California at all; in any
event for a long time. Then again, Dick
might not see his way to come to live in
cities, and Esse had already begun to
appreciate the refinements of life sufficiently 
well to make it impossible for her
to even contemplate an isolated life in the
woods or on the mountains.  Picnicing,
191

and especially in a honeymoon form, might
be delightful, fascinating, of unspeakable
joy; but such life, without relief, would
never suit her as an unvarying constancy.
From the glimpses which she had had into
Dick’s shanty she knew well enough that
the measure of his refinement would not
reach her own minimum standard, and she
had doubts from her experience of his
improvement in small matters if he would
readily lend himself — if he could lend himself, 
even if he so desired—to a loftier social
condition. These were certainly arguments
which tended to damp the zeal begotten
of absence, and the stimulating effect of
pleasant memory working upon a morbid
but fervid imagination. When in the
anemic condition Esse’s imagination was
apt to run away with her, though when her
system was well furnished with red blood
her fancies and desires were healthy and
under control. Now that the strain of her
self-imposed secrecy had been relieved, her
192

health began to mend, and the improvement 
was manifest in the ready manner in
which she yielded herself to her surroundings, 
and began to make the most of them ;
thus mental and physical health began to
act and react on each other, and Mrs.
Elstree’s heart rejoiced as she saw the
improvement in her daughter. Soon Esse
began to show something of the same
robustness which she had achieved on
Shasta. Her chalky pallor yielded to a delicate 
rose colour which, tingeing her brown
skin, made a charming union of health
and refinement. Her figure began to fill
out, and within a few weeks from the time
of Peter Blyth’s departure she looked quite
a different being from the pallid, meagre,
green-sick girl whom he had left. Peter
had telegraphed from New York that he
had to go to London, but that he looked
to return in about two months. He had
said nothing of Dick, thinking it wiser to be
silent until he knew for certain whether he
193

would turn up in San Francisco. Mrs.
Elstree did her best to keep Esse up to
the mark of health and energy at which
she had arrived; and she so laid herself out
to this end that her house became the very
centre of the most pleasant circle in San
Francisco, Every stranger who arrived
was of course introduced to her, and not a
few found an excuse for prolonging their
stay in order to share again her charming 
hospitality and the companionship of
Esse. There was a constant succession of
luncheons, dinners, balls, picnics, and all
those harmless gatherings which have no
definite name, but which have a charm of
their own in their freedom and the relaxing 
of the bonds of conventionality.
Amongst the strangers who came, and
in natural course made Mrs. Elstree’s
acquaintance, was a young English painter,
who had already made a great name for
himself. He was one of those who had
not attached himself to any art school long
194

enough to be cramped by its inevitable
littleness. He had skipped lightly through
the various schools of the world, learning
and adapting all their methods to his own
genius, and keeping his mind and imagination 
fresh by a perpetual study of Nature
in all her moods. Partly by nature, and
partly by merit of his varied training, he
was of a most charming personality, with
gentler manners and keener refinement
than might have been expected from his
strength and stature. As, in addition to
his other qualifications, he was remarkably
handsome, it was small wonder that he
was looked upon with favour by the ladies
in San Francisco, and with a certain reserved 
tolerance by the men. Even the
instantaneous heartiness of his reception
by the Bohemian Club did not allay the
misgivings of certain young men of pleasure, 
unattached,
Between Mr. Hampden and Esse a
friendship soon sprang up, and this was
195

fostered by the opportunities given by her
sitting to him for her portrait, and his
finally coming to stay as a guest in the
house. To him the freshness and artless
simplicity of Esse was akin to those grand
simplicities of Nature which had been the
study of his life; and it was little wonder
that when for some time his art and human
sympathies had been thus united and centred 
in so charming a young lady as Esse,
his feelings of friendship should have taken
a warmer turn. Before the month was over
he was head over ears in love with her.
And Esse? By this time, sad to tell,
Esse had quite overlooked, if indeed she
had not forgotten, the fact of Dick’s existence. 
Sometimes, when some accidental
allusion or expression suggested the idea,
she remembered him, but as a far-off and
independent fact ; she never connected him
now with her own life. He was, and
would be till the end of her life, a true and
faithful friend, whose memory was set in a
196

frame of romantic picturesqueness, as a
miniature is set round with diamonds; but
he did not belong to the living present at
all. And, strangely enough, when he had
come to occupy this place in Esse’s mind,
all the pleasant things began to cluster
round him again. His individuality was a
centre round which crystallized all the
pleasant lesser memories of the summer on
Shasta. Once or twice in the night time,
when something kept her awake, Esse
thought, with burning blushes, of her confiding 
to Peter Blyth the one secret of her
life. She wondered how she could have
done such a thing, and was angry with
herself for what she now considered her
mistaken idea as to her own feelings, as
well as for her unmaidenly confidence.
With a gush of thankfulness she remembered 
Peter's sudden call to the East, and
determined that on his return, and before
any harm could be done, she would set
that matter right in a few words. Mrs.
197

Elstree saw what Esse herself did not see,
that she was herself becoming, nay, had
already become, in love with the young
painter; and as she in every way approved
of him as a possible son-in-law, she allowed
matters to freely run their course. Esse’s
romantic feeling for Dick belonged to the
school-girl phase of her existence ; but the
new affection was the expression of her .
woman’s life, and it differed as much from
the former in its strength as in its consciousness. 
The episode of Shasta was, in
a sort of way, the “preliminary canter” of
her affections, and had all the consciousness 
of its limited purpose; whereas the
later and truer love had all the unconscious,
serious earnestness of the race itself, where
means are forgotten and only the end is
held in view. There was no thought of
Dick in her mind, no regret, no remorse,
even no pity of his wasted and ruined life,
as a few months ago she would have considered 
it. There was, in fact, no thought
198

or recollection of Dick at all, when, in
answer to Reginald Hampden’s passionate
appeal, she put her two hands in his, and
their lips met in love’s first long kiss.
That evening, as they sat hand-in-hand
in the little drawing-room, where there was
no one else, in that early darkness which is
the nearest thing to twilight which California 
can produce, Esse, with a manifest
purpose, and with many flutterings of the
heart, told Reginald that she had a confession 
to make. He, with the amused,
superior tolerance of a successful lover,
encouraged her by gentle words and manifold 
tender caresses to proceed. As a
man of the world he knew that, as a rule,
the sins which well-bred young ladies have
to confess to their fiancés are merely self-distrustful 
exaggerations of minor indiscretions, 
or breaches of temper. With a
sinking heart Esse began, for now that
she had to speak of Dick again to
a third person, his figure loomed up uncommonly
199

large into the foreground of her
thoughts.
“It is about Shasta!” she said, in an
almost inaudible voice.
“ About Shasta, dear, that is lovely! I
like to hear you speak of that sweet spot!
I think I am in love with it myself from
what I have heard you and your mother
say of it. I am thinking already, Esse ”—
here he drew her closer to him-—-“ how you
and I shall go there some summer and
have a fresh honeymoon!” Esse was
silent; there were conflicting thoughts
in her mind, and she listened as he
went on:
" You shall show me all over the place ;
the seat on the rocks on the edge of the
plateau, where we shall see together the
sunset over the sea; the sun-dial of the
trees by which we shall reckon the hours
of our happiness—for, my dear, we shall not
be able to keep any other reckoning, they
shall go so quickly; the spot where you
200

killed the bear; and then we shall come up
by the way you carried Dick. You see,
dear, I know them all!”
“It is about Dick I want to speak !”
“Speak on, Esse dear; I like to hear
about him! What a splendid fellow he
must be! I want to shake him by the
hand; he saved the life of my little girl,
and she saved his! Why, we must be like
brother and sister to Dick!”
“But, Reginald, I must tell you about
him before you say -——” Here Reginald
interrupted her.
“Isn't Dick the splendid, brave fellow
that I think him; the manly, upright
gentleman of nature, with the freshness
and splendour of the wood and mountain
upon him!”
“Oh yes! he is all that ; there is nobody
in the world braver or nobler than Dick!
You can’t say anything too good of him.
But that’s just it! You may not like it that
I — one time -—— before I met you -—- thought
201

all the world of him!” Reginald laughed,
and caught her again to him; he was glad of
these excuses for demonstrative affection.
“ Oh you dear little high-minded goose!”
he said. “Why, of course you thought all
the world of him! So would any girl! If
I were a girl 1 would go my boots on a
splendid fellow like that.” Esse began to
breathe more freely, though the worst was
yet to come; she had to finish her confession, 
She bravely went on:
“ That would be bad enough if only you
knew it, but I told it to Peter Blyth !”
“ And who may Peter Blyth be ?” asked
Reginald, with a tinge of jealousy in his
voice.
“He is an old friend of my mother's.
He was my dead father’s greatest friend,
and he is a sort of guardian to us both.”
“Oh!” said Reginald, partly satisfied, so
Esse went on.
“I don’t know why I told him — that I —
I — wanted to see Dick — but I did; and he
202

said he would see Dick some time and that
he would come and see me!” Here she
covered her face with her hands, and in the
dusk Reginald could see that she was crying. 
He took it that it was partly from
regret and partly from vexation, so he
asked another question in order to distract
her mind:
“ And did he come?”
“Oh no!” Esse started up and looked
at him with wet eyes. “Oh no! and I
hope he never will! Peter Blyth was called
away to New York the very next day, and
from there had to go on to London, so I
am in hopes that he will never tell Dick.
When he comes [ shall ask him never to
say another word about it again as long as
he lives, or never even to think of it!”
Reginald thought for a moment and then
spoke. “Would it not be well to send Mr.
Blyth a cable?”
“Why so?”
“ Because he might go up to Shasta on
203

his way back. And, my dearest, that
would never do. In addition to making
you uncomfortable it would not be fair to
Dick. He would take it to heart that he
had been so invited; and without any
blame on his part he would feel that he
had been deprived of a great happiness !”
“Oh, Dick would not mind!”
“ How do you know ?”
“If he had cared about me he would have
said so long ago!” from which it could be
seen that poor Dick’s silence was already
beginning to be construed into a fault, and
his blindness into an offence. Reginald
hardly took the same view as Esse on the
subject, but he was none the less contented.
However, they agreed that it would be no
harm to send a cable to Peter Blyth to his
London address, for Esse did not know
where he stayed in New York, and the
following was despatched :
“Do nothing about Dick till I see
you. -— Esse.”
204

The next evening Mrs. Elstree had a
reception of all her friends, and she thought
that it would be a good occasion to make
known Esse’s engagement. Her receptions
were given in English style, and as she had
brought over English servants, her Californian 
friends were always interested in the
way things were done. They generally
ended however in an impromptu dance,
American fashion, When the night arrived
Mrs. Elstree received, just as she was
going to dress, a telegram from Peter
Blyth :
“ Arrive in evening ; dining on car.” So
she gave instructions to have his room prepared. 
Presently the guests began to
assemble, and both Esse and her mother
were busy receiving them, Reginald naturally 
not being far off, and being now and
then introduced in his new capacity. There
were congratulations on all sides, and a
well-bred hum arose throughout the rooms.
In the midst of the festivities a tall,
205

powerful-looking man, walking with long
strides, but putting his feet down as though
they were cramped, came to the house and
knocked. When the liveried footman
opened the door he said :
“ Say, boss, does Mrs. Elstree live here?”
The man had only been imported a few
days, and, as he had come to the West with
vague ideas as to snakes and scalping, and
other American common-places, and would
not have been surprised if he had seen a
tribe of Indians on the war-path in Montgomery 
Street, answered with his usual
imperturbability :
“Yes, sir, she receives to-night.”
“Kin I go in?”
“Certingly, sir, if my mistress was expecting 
of you.”
“I know Little Missy is.”
“ Miss Elstree is within too, she receives
with her mother.”
“ Then, General, I guess I'll just cavort
in and pay my respects.” The man motioned
206

him in, and he was handed over to
another footman, who took his hat and
said :
“What neem, sir?”
“Guess, Colonel, you have me there!”
" What neem shall I enounce ?”
“My name? Oh, I tumble! Jest you say
Grizzly Dick of Shasta!” The man called
up the staircase to another footman half
way up:
“Mis-tar Greezly Dick of Shost-ar!”
The second man called on to another, at
the door of the drawing-room :
“Mr, Greazy Dick of Shostar!” And the
latter shouted the name into the room, in a
Hibernian accent :
“Misther Crazy Dick Shostoo!” Dick
was for an instant amazed by the wilderness 
of strange faces, the myriad lights,
the hum and movement of the scene; and
as for Mrs. Elstree and Esse, they were
for a moment ignorant of the personality
of their visitor. The Dick who now stood
207

blinking in the doorway, and awkwardly
shuffling his feet, had little resemblance,
except in stature, to the Dick whom they
had known on Shasta.
When the time for his visit to San Francisco 
was ripe, Dick had come as far as
Sacramento, and had then prepared him-
self for what he considered a fashionable
visit. This he did by getting himself up
as like as he could to the more aristocratic-looking 
of the Two Macs, as that
individual had dwelt in his memory, combined 
with the most stylish of gamblers
and barmen, from living examples. His
general effect was enhanced by the failure
of the goods exhibited in the various
tailors’ shops, and “misfit parlors” to adapt
themselves to the great bulk and free,
sinuous carriage of the hunter. Dick had
thus arrayed himself in a blue claw-hammer
coat with brass buttons, a low-cut waistcoat 
f mighty pattern, in plaid of many
colours, in which primary shades of scarlet,
208

yellow, and blue, predominated, a light pair
of yellow cord trousers, of preternatural
tightness, and enormous patent leather
pumps, which were all too small to be easy
on feet accustomed to mocassins. His
shirt was what far-western salesmen call
“ dressy,” and exhibited on its bosom many
rows of fancy pleating with, between them,
masses of herring-bone handwork, such as
the rustic maiden is wont to exhibit on her
Sunday petticoat. <A red tie with big bows
and fringed ends, and some massive gold
studs of fancy pattern, to match the watch
chain, which lay across his diaphragm like
a hawser, completed his toilet. But Dick,
not feeling complete, even in this. subjugatory 
attire, had been to the barber’s and
undergone a process of curling, oiling, and
scenting, which alone would have isolated
him in any high-bred society throughout
the world. Add to these disadvantages a
manner composed of equal parts of unchastened 
ease of gait and shy awkwardness,
209

and it is little wonder that the ladies did
not at once recognize their old friend the
free-gaited, bold, natural child of the mountains. 
Esse was the first to recognize him,
and stepping forward, held out both her
hands with eager welcome, utterly forgetting, 
in’ the surprise of seeing him, her
previous anxiety as to his possible coming.
At the moment, however, Dick had recognized 
Mrs. Elstree and had stepped forward
and taken her by the hand, and was beginning 
to work the pump-handle shake, which
she already knew, and dreaded. This peculiar 
shake of Dick’s was a work of time,
and Mrs. Elstree knew that the best way
to get over it was to submit quietly; she
was not sorry also, to have a moment in
which to collect her thoughts, for it flashed
on her that so strange an appearance, and
so unexpected a coming, must have some
special cause. She had a half fear that
there was some trouble in store for Esse,
or with her; and as she knew that the eyes
210

of all fashionable San Francisco were on
her, she felt that it behoved her to be
cautious. She instantly determined on a
course of action—heartiness. Dick was an
unconventional person, and when the guests
knew and realized who and what he was,
the manifest surprise and amazement with
which they were already regarding him
would cease. He had saved Esse’s life,
and she had saved his, and under very
strange and unusual circumstances. This
alone would justify his appearance, and
any reception that might be accorded to
him. So she said effusively :
“Why, Mr. Grizzly Dick, this is a
treat! I am delighted to see you in
San Francisco! Do you make a long
stay?”
In the meantime Esse stood with outstretched 
hands, for she did not like to
draw them back, lest Dick should think
she was offended, and so waited. Before
Dick could reply to her mother he saw
21l

them, and answering: “Thank ye, marm!”
turned to Esse and said:
“Wall, Little Missy, if this ain’t jest
the all-firedest, highest old time as ever
was. My! but ye look purty; like a ripe
apple ready to be bit. An’ do ye remember
the b’ar, and the way yer frock was tore all
away? Durn me if the old-man grizzly
was here himself now, he wouldn’t have
the heart to lay a claw on ye!” As he
spoke he had taken her hand, and was
subjecting her in turn to the pump-handle
ordeal. Esse answered with what heartiness 
she could muster, for there was a look
in Dick’s eye, a sort of assuring her, which
was quite new to her, and which made her
anxious as to what might happen. She
would have given worlds that her mother
knew the exact state of affairs, for she
could and would have helped her at any
cost; but her mother did not know, and
she must now trust to Providence and the
chapter of accidents. In the meantime,
212

other guests were arriving, and they both
had to receive them. Mrs. Elstree saw so
much of the difficulty as that Dick would
become a nuisance if he did not pass on
with the rest, so she said sweetly :
“Won't you take a seat for a few minutes,
Mr. Dick? Esse and I have to stand
here a little while to receive our guests;
but we shall come to you very soon.”
Dick laughed his boisterous laugh—how
Esse felt at the moment that she disliked
it—which more than ever attracted all eyes
to him, and with a rough bow and a “ Count
on me, marm, every time!” withdrew to the
other end of the room. Feeling thoroughly
awkward in such a novel situation, he began
to make up for his want of savoir faire by
brazen impudence, this being his idea of
easy deportment.
At this time Peter Blyth arrived at the
house, and went upstairs to his room to
dress himself for the evening.
213

IX.
It was some little time before either Mrs
Elstree or Esse could get an opportunity
of rejoining Dick. The news of Esse’s
engagement had got about, and all her
friends made a point of coming round to
offer good wishes. The stream seemed to
Esse as if it would never end, for with
each moment her anxiety grew. Those
who have not experienced it cannot understand 
the rapidity with which a desire for
a few moments’ thought grows, until it
becomes a sort of agony. Esse was in a
way chained to the social stake. She had
to stay by her mother, to smile, and give
her whole thoughts to what was going on
around her. She would have given anything 
to have had time to warn her mother,
or Reginald, to take care of Dick, and find
214

out his purpose ; for all the time unconscious
cerebration was working, and she was
rapidly coming to the conclusion that Peter
Blyth’s message had gone, and that Dick’s
presence was an answer to it. Reginald
saw with the eyes of love her anxiety, but
could do nothing to allay it; he, too, was
chained to the stake by the exceptional
circumstances of his social duty. Presently
they heard a loud laugh in the room behind
them, followed by a titter of feminine voices,
and a louder laugh from men. Esse felt
her ears burning. Her mother shot a
quick glance at her and said sotto voce :
“ Never mind, dear, we shall be able to
attend to him in a few moments; I see the
stream is slackening.” A few minutes
more and the last of the guests, except
stragglers, had arrived, and they were free
to move about. Esse went off to look for
Dick, for she felt that he was safest with
her, and that she was safest too, for she did
not know what he might not do or say
215

in his strange surroundings. She found
him in the midst of a group of the smartest
young people in San Francisco society,
Poor Dick in his ignorance thought he was
getting on capitally, for in the society in
which he had hitherto mixed the person
who caused the loudest laughter was most
esteemed of the company. He had with his
native taste and daring selected out the prettiest 
girl in the room, one who though ostensibly 
one of Esse’s “dearest friends” yet bore
her no good will since it had been apparent
to her that Reginald Hampden, upon whom
she had set her heart, was in love with her
friend. The recent knowledge of their
engagement was gall and wormwood to her,
and she was delighted to have an opportunity 
of making Esse feel uncomfortable.
Dick had opened his conversation with a
piece of complimentary pleasantry such as
he would have used to a barmaid in a
dancing saloon, nothing coarse, nothing
unpleasant, but altogether familiar and out
216

of place in a conventional assembly. The
young lady was not offended, a girl very
seldom is at being singled out for compliment 
by a fine-looking man, be he never so
rude in his style; but she saw her opportunity, 
and led him on. She had seen the
familiarity of Esse’s greeting, and, though
she did not comprehend the whole situation,
saw that there was fun for her and others,
and some sort of humiliation for her friend.
So she at once began to ask Dick questions,
and to encourage him to laugh and make
remarks. Some of her smart set came
round, and a game of refined bantering
began, the victim being unconscious of his
ridiculous position, and of the ridicule
showered upon him, That was the fun of
the game — Dick was not the build of
person that a man would ostensibly make
game of, unless he wanted a fight. She
asked him all about Esse, and supposed all
manner of things as to their friendship ;
and in fine brought Dick to the point of
217

bragging, not of his own prowess, but of
hers. This involved an appearance of
familiarity with Esse, and as he went on
she gently insinuated that they must be
great friends : at last she daringly said :
“Tf IT was a man, and a girl saved my
life, I would ask her to marry me. I think
it would be the least I could do!”
“Now, do ye really think so, miss?
Wall, I do admire! Do tell, now, how
ye’d set about it?” Poor Dick had quite
fallen into the trap through his very simplicity, 
and the honesty of his purpose in
coming to the city. His tormentor, gathering 
courage from the winks and smiles of
her male admirers round her, said:
“In the most open way I could! I’d ask
her before all her friends, so that there.
might be no mistake. If I wanted to
honour her by the offer of my hand arid heart
there should not be any slouch about it!”
“Shake!” said Dick, extending his
mighty hand, and half a moment later his
218

new friend, with a rueful smile, raised a
crumpled hand, and looked at the blood,
where her rings had cut into her crushed
fingers, which was beginning to show
through the rent in her glove.
“Oh, I say,” said one of her admirers,
“has the clumsy brute hurt you?”
“ Miss,” said Dick, “I humbly beg yer
pardon! I never thought of how tender
ye women critters is. I should have
known better.” Then he turned to the
last speaker and said : ;
“Look here, Jedge, I wouldn’t be so
free with them cuss words o’ yourn. Ef
ye fling them about so promiscous, some
one is apt to be hurt. They're worse’n
chunks of rock, anyway!” The man addressed 
ran his eye up him from his boots
to his oily hair, but said nothing.
At this moment Esse came forward, and
Dick, seeing her, and with her a way out
of the embarrassment due to his clumsy
strength, stepped towards her, and delivered
219

himself of a little speech which he had
rehearsed to himself an innumerable number
of times on his journey from Shasta. He
had submitted it to his casual friends the barkeeper 
and the barber at Sacramento, and
armed with their approval, and fortified by
the expression of Esse’s young lady friend,
whom he took to typify fashionable society,
and who had used almost his words, he had
no hesitation now in speaking. Dick was
in no wise a coward; he could face an
awkward situation, and, like many another
man, he had only to begin to find all his
difficulty removed. Esse stood amazed
when he began his speech, and fora moment
looked helplessly round her; but then,
catching Reginald’s eye as he stood on the
outskirts of the little throng, braced herself
to the situation, and smoothed her face to a
grave smile by mere force of education
and habit.
“Little Missy! An honest man’s love is
all that he can give the proudest lady! I am
220

only a simple man, but I have come from
the snows of Shasta to do ye the only
honour in my power. I am glad to do it
before your honoured friends and your
family circle. Will you honour me by
becoming my wife and giving me your
heart and hand?” Having spoken, he
looked calmly around him, as one does
who has done a meritorious action, and
done it well. Esse felt the blood rushing
up to her head, and burning her cheeks and
ears, as she heard the titter of laughter
around her. Dick heard it too, and faced
round with a quick flush.
It was just at this moment that Peter
Blyth came into the room, standing just
inside the doorway. He saw instantly that
something was afoot, and said to the servant
at the door:
“Who is that, Stephens? that gentleman
with the shiny hair, with his back towards us?”
“That, sir? I think his name is Mr.
Measly Shostoo, or words to that effek,!”
221

“ Mr. how much ?”
“Measly Shostoo, sir. I didn’t hear
him pernounce it hisself, for I was a-taking
of the ‘ats in the ’all, but only on the transgression.” 
Just then, Dick turned, and
Peter saw him, and instantly recognized
the situation. He hurried in, but too late
to be of any immediate service, and stood
by, ready.
Esse did not know exactly what she
should do, but instinctively she put her
hand up, and said with a smile:
“Oh, Dick, Dick! not before all these
people! They'll think you are making
game of me.” One of the smart young
men here said:
“ Making game of her! He isa hunter!
Good!” Dick turned on him like lightning :
“Dry up there, mister! I don’t make
game of no female of her sex; and 1 don’t
allow no man to say I do, see? Look ye
here, Little Missy, this is honest Injin, a
right square game; and, durn me, but I,
222

mean it down to my boots. This ain’t no
ten-cent ante, no bluff on a pair, but a dead
sure thing—a straight flush, ace high!”
Instantly there was a chorus of ironical
remarks from the men all round:
“I straddle the blind!”
“ Raise him out of his boots, pard!”
“I go you two chips better!”
“ Make it a Jack-pot!”
Dick looked around again scornfully, but
as he did so he ‘caught Esse’s eye, and
seemed to recognize the story which it
told; the ripple of laughter around, however, 
filled up the blanks, where there were
any to fill, Dick felt that he was fooled.
He was, as may have been seen already, a
vain man, all the more vain because of the
consciousness of its own strength. Hitherto
in his life he had only been tested in ways
that brought out his natural force and left
it triumphant ; and the habit of his life was
behind him to resent an affront. He glared
at the ring of faces around him, and this
223

time his look meant mischief to all who
knew danger signals in a man’s face. Con-
trolling himself with an effort, he said to Esse:
“ Little Missy, ye ain't a-foolin’ me, air
ye?”
“Oh, no, Dick; no, no!
“Then I wish I had that laughin’ jackass
that kem all the way up on Shasta to fool me
— to fool me in face of all these ——” Here
he looked around again, and, as he did so,
whipped from the collar of his coat his
great bowie knife and, pressing the spring,
threw it open with a dexterous jerk. No
woman screamed; it takes more than a
generation of ignorance of such matters to
make women fear cold steel. But there
was more than one woman present who in
earlier days had seen just such quiet anger
flame out and end in murder, and with one
accord they drew back and left the men
in front. Dick, seeing only men’s faces,
finished his scornful sentence: “ These —
these swine!” There he is, the laughin’
224,

jackass hisself!” he said, seeing Peter
Blyth’s face in the ring, where the withdrawal 
of the womenkind had left him in
the front.
With a sudden spring he caught him by
the throat with his powerful left hand, and
held him as in a vice. Esse was paralyzed, 
and could make neither sound nor
stir, and Peter Blyth found himself, for
the first time in his life, face to face with
sudden death. The rest of the men round
feared to stir, not for themselves, for there
was not one of them, being Californians,
who would not cheerfully have made the
battle his own ; but they were all unarmed,
and they feared that in his present infuriated 
condition Dick might do a brutal
violence before he could be restrained. As
for Peter his manhood stood to him. He
did not flinch, but with cool, calm courage
faced the situation. On one side was Dick,
more dangerous than any wild animal, and
ready to do anything, as he thundered out :
225

“ Now, ye dog, tell me what ye meant
by foolin’ me and shamin’ me this way ;
and beg my pardon, or by the Almighty
I'll corpse ye—whar ye stand!” On the
other side was Esse’s quivering face, all
fright; but fright of many kinds, for Peter,
and for the shame of the open exposure
of her secret which she saw coming.
Peter Blyth did not himself quite know
how matters stood: he had not yet heard
of Esse’s engagement to Reginald. All he
knew was that Dick was there in such a
rage that it might mean death and disaster
and life-long sorrow to those he loved.
The comedy had all at once and, with a
vengeance, become a tragedy. So he was
silent, and Dick, who was all man, even in
his blood-madness, recognized the courage
in him, and with an imperious gesture
threw him off, saying:
“I suppose ye ain't no worse nor the
rest. I’ve seen the day when I cleared out
the Holy Moses saloon in Portland for less
226

than this. Answer me some of ye! what
does it all mean?” It was a terrible situation, 
and in all that roomful of people, now
as still as death, there was not one whose
heart did not beat quickly, or seem to stand
still at the thought of the potent, reckless,
fatal force which seemed to have been let
loose amongst them. In the midst of the
silence Reginald Hampden stepped out,
and Esse felt glad, and a new sense of
relief, as she noticed his calm and gallant
bearing. He moved towards Dick, and
said with courtly sweetness :
“I hope I may speak here, since it is
my privilege to speak for Miss Elstree!
Look, sir! Look ; the young lady! You are
distressing her! I know you to be a brave
man, and, from all I have heard her say to
your honour, I am quite sure you would
not willingly cause her harm or humiliate
her. See, sir! you are crushing her to the
dust!” as he spoke he went to Esse and
stood beside her.
227

A quick flush seemed to leap up
Dick’s face from neck to forehead; his
hand dropped, and with a sound in his
throat between a sob and a gasp he
said :
“Little Missy, forgive me if ye can! I
must have gone mad! This galoot here
was pretty right when he called me a brute.
Let me get back to the b’ars an’ the Injuns.
I'm more to home with them than I am
here. Be easy, Little Missy, an’ ye too, all
ye ladies and gentlemen ; it'll be no plea-
sant thinkin’ for me up yonder, away among
the mountings, that when I kem down to
’Frisco, meanin’ to do honour to a young
lady that I’d give the best drop of my blood
for — and she knows it — I couldn’t keep my
blasted hands off my weppins in the midst
of a crowd of women! Durn the thing! I
ain’t fit to go heeled inter decent kempany!”
As he spoke he lifted his arm, and with a
mighty downward sweep hurled down his
bowie knife, so that it stuck inches deep into
228

the oaken floor, where it quivered. Once
more he turned to Esse:
“Forgive me, Little Missy; an’ if ye kin
forgit me, an’ the shame I’ve brought upon
ye and yer house!” He bowed and
was moving away, when again Reginald, to
whom Esse had whispered, strode forward.
“No, sir! You must not go like that.
There is a mistake here which must be set
right! You will understand me when I
tell you that Miss Elstree has done me the
honour to consent to be my wife. You
have been put in a false position. It is
quite true that Esse wished to see you;
that she asked her friend, Mr. Blyth, to
carry such a message to you. Believe me,
that she does understand and appreciate
the honour that you have done her, though,
I must say, in some justification of these
other ladies and gentlemen, in so unconventional 
a manner. But you must not leave
the house in such a way! Believe me, you
are, and ever shall be, an honoured guest in
229 

a house to which you have saved so dear a
life!” And he put his arm round Esse who
had got suddenly pale and seemed about to
faint.
“One of you boys,” he said, “pick up
Dick's knife and give it to him. I can’t
move yet!” One of the young men took the
handle and tugged at it, but in vain. There
was a laugh; another tried it, but with the
same effect. A smile stole over the pale
anger of Dick’s face; he was beginning to
yield to the humour of the situation, and
he stood silent where he was. Mrs. Elstree
came forward, she had only just come
into the room, having been in the music-room, 
and did not understand what was
going on, but seeing Esse’s head drooping
had flown to her side. Reginald, finding her
mother’s arms round her, left her side and
striding forward, seized the handle of the
bowie knife. With a sharp jerk, and with
a force which made his arm tingle from
wrist to shoulder, and sent the blood up
230

into his head, he plucked it from the floor
amid a buzz of approval, and a responsive
“Good!” from Dick as he slapped his thigh
in his old fashion. He stepped over to
Dick, shutting the knife with an experienced
jerk, and held it out him: “Your weapon, .
sir!” he said, “but I should be very proud
if you will let me keep it, in memory of a
brave man to whom I and others owe so
much !”
“Take it,” said Dick, “an’ welkim! The
poor thing ‘ll never, I am sure, be disgraced
by ye as it was to-night by me. Shake!
Ye’re a man, ye are; and I wish you and
Little Missy all the happiness in the
world!”
The two men shook hands and Reginald
went on:
“You'll let me give you this in exchange,
I hope.” He drew from his pocket, and
detached from its gold chain, a beautiful
hunting knife. “It is not merely that it
is mine, but it was given me by an, emperor,
231

who was good enough to say I had
done him some service when a wild boar
charged him in a Thuringian forest.” Dick
took the knife:
“I'll take it and keep it, pard, because on
my soul I believe it will pleasure ye if I
wear it! An’ now, good night, an’ I humbly
ask all yer pardon for my conduct! Forget 
it and me if ye can!” and he moved to
the door.
Here Mrs. Elstree spoke out; Esse
had been whispering to her during the
foregoing :
“No, no, Mr. Grizzly Dick, you must
not go! There is no one who can come
into my house that I could be more glad to
see. You must stay and show us all that
you forgive us that we have amongst us
made you, for a time, uncomfortable !”
He paused, and Esse stepped up to
him, her eyes this time full of tears, and
said:
“Yes, Dick, do stay; if only to show me
232

that you forgive me! And that you are
not unhappy for what has passed. Dick—
D—D-—Dick, sh—sh—shake!” her tears
fell as he clasped her two hands and whispered 
to her:
“ Lord love ye, Little Missy, I ain't a-goin
to be on happy. Why, I only kem down
from the mounting because I heerd tell that
it was like ye wanted me. I didn’t believe
it myself, an’ I feared it would be a mistake
if ye did. But that wasn’t my affair, but
yourn; an’ whatever ye’d do would be right
enough for me. An’ as to forgivin’ !—Wall
of course I'll stay if ye wish it. I think
I’ve made this jamboree pretty dismal
enough already, without refusin’ to do
anything I kin do to help make it lively
again.” Another voice now joined in, that
of the young lady who had commenced the
trouble.
“Yes, stay! Do stay, Mr. Grizzly Dick,
and presently you must dance with me, if
only to show me that you forgive my bad
233

manners and my unkindness of heart. And
if you do tread on my toes, I guess we'll be
about even!”
“ Done with ye, miss; but I’m afeerd this
here rig out of mine ain’t jest exactly
the thing for a fash’nable party. So ye'll
hev to excuse me.”
“Never mind, Dick,’ said Reginald
heartily ; “we are all friends of yours here !
If there are any who are not so, then they
are no friend of our hostess or of me either;
and I'll stand back to back, if you'll let me,
when we slice up the last of them!” Dick
smiled a good ten-inch smile, and just then
catching sight of Peter Blyth’s face he
slapped his thigh and burst out into a
peal of laughter. Going over to him he held
out his hand saying :
“ Ye'll forgive me, pard, won't ye; though
I mighty near skelped ye? Ye took it well
though! Durned, but ye took it standin’
with yer boots on! I only hope I'll take it
as well when my time comes; fur ye had
234

a close call that time—closer’n ever, ye’ll
hev it again. Shake!” the two men shook
hands, and Peter Blyth, within his mind’s
eye the recollection of their first meeting,
roared with laughing too. Then Reginald
came and slapped him on the shoulder and.
said:
“Come with me, Dick. I’ve got something 
that will make you feel more comfortable 
than this Sacramento rig out!”
Then he straightway took him off to his
own room.
Some fifteen minutes afterwards there
was a buzz of admiration through the room
when Dick entered, clad in a hunter's
outfit, something like his own, which Reginald 
had some time before bought from the
Indians as a model for his work.
There was about him something so fresh,
and wild, and free—so noble a simplicity
and manhood, that more than one woman
present did not wonder that Esse had
asked him to come down to Frisco.
